# Introduction

Shorewall supports several mechanisms for limiting connection rates. These are described in the following sections.

Rates are expressed in terms of a connections per unit time and a `burst`. An interval is calculated by dividing the unit of time by the number of connections allowed in that unit of time (\<connections\>/{`sec`\|`min`\|`hour`\|`day`\|week\|month}\[:\<burst\>\]

Example: 4/min:5

Connections = 4

Unit of time = 1 minute

Interval = 1 minute/4 = 15 seconds.

Burst = 5

As each connection arrives,if the burst count is \> 0 the burst count is reduced by one and the connection is accepted. After each interval (15 seconds) that passes without a connection arriving, the burst count is incremented by 1 but is not allowed to exceed its initial setting (5).

By default, the aggregate connection rate is limited. If the specification is preceded by "`s:`" or "`d:`", then the rate is limited per SOURCE or per DESTINATION IP address respectively.

## Policy Rate Limiting

The LIMIT column in the `/etc/shorewall/policy` file applies to TCP connections that are subject to the policy. The limiting is applied BEFORE the connection request is passed through the rules generated by entries in `/etc/shorewall/rules`. Those connections in excess of the limit are logged and dropped.

## Rules Rate Limiting

The RATE LIMIT column in the `/etc/shorewall/rules` file allows limiting of ACCEPT, DNAT and Action rules.

## Limit Action

The [Limit Action](../concepts/Actions.md#Limit) is a legacy mechanism that limits connections per source IP. It does not support the notion of a burst size.
