# Introduction

Shorewall version 4.0 represented a substantial shift in direction for Shorewall. Up until then

- Shorewall had been written entirely in Bourne Shell.

- Shorewall had run the `iptables` utility to add each Netfilter rule.

Shorewall version 4.0 offered you a choice. You could continue to use the existing shell-based implementation or you could use a new implementation of the Shorewall compiler written in the Perl programming language. The new compiler:

- had a small disk footprint

- was very fast.

- generateed a firewall script that uses `iptables-restore`; so the script was very fast.

- generated better and more consistent error messages.

- did a much more thorough job of checking the configuration to avoid run-time errors.

- supported creating either Ipv4 or Ipv6 firewalls (Shorewall 4.2.4 and later).

[Both compilers could be installed on your system](Shorewall-perl.md#Install) and you could [use whichever one suited you in a particular case](Shorewall-perl.md#CompilerSelection).

# Shorewall 4.4

Shorewall 4.4 discontinued the availability of the legacy shell-based compiler. All users must migrate to the perl-based compiler before or during an upgrade to Shorewall version 4.4 or later. We highly recommend that current users of the shell-based compiler migrate before upgrading to 4.4 or later so that both compilers are available during the migration.

Shorewall 4.4 contains five packages:

- **Shorewall** - Everything needed to create an IPv4 firewall.

- **Shorewall-lite**- Can run scripts generated by Shorewall on another system.

- **Shorewall6** - The utilities for creating and operating an Ipv6 firewall. Requires Shorewall.

- **Shorewall6-lite** - Ipv6 equivalent of Shorewall Lite. Can run scripts generated by Shoreall on another system.

- **Shorewall-init** - An add-on package for any of the other packages which can:

  1.  Secure the firewall(s) prior to bringing up the interfaces (does not work with systems running Upstart)

  2.  React to ifup/ifdown events and restart the firewall(s) if needed

# Shorewall 4.5/4.6

Shorewall 4.5 added an additional **Shorewall-core** package. This package contains the core Shorewall shell libraries that are required by the other packages.

# Prerequisites for using the Shorewall Version 4.2/4.4/4.5/4.6 Perl-based Compiler

- Perl (I use Perl 5.14.2 but other 5.8 or later versions should work fine).

  <div class="note">

  If you want to be able to use DNS names in your Shorewall6 configuration files, then Perl 5.10 or later is required together with the Perl **Socket6** module.

  </div>

- Perl **Cwd** Module

- Perl **File::Basename** Module

- Perl **File::Temp** Module

- Perl **Getopt::Long** Module

- Perl **Carp** Module

- Perl **FindBin** Module

- Perl **Scalar::Util** Module

- Perl **Digest::SHA1** Module (Shorewall 4.5 only)

Please note that there are [additional requirements](../features/IPv6Support.md) if you plan to install and use Shorewall6.

# Incompatibilities Introduced in the Shorewall Version 4 Perl-based Compiler

The Shorewall Perl-based compiler is not 100% compatible with the Shorewall shell-based version. See [this document](Shorewall-perl.md) for details.
