.TH SHOREWALL-NFT-TCINTERFACES 5 "2026-04-20" "shorewall-nft 1.10.0" "File Formats"
.SH NAME
shorewall\-nft\-tcinterfaces \- simplified traffic shaping interface declarations for shorewall-nft
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I tcinterfaces
file provides a simpler alternative to
.I tcdevices
for declaring interfaces used in traffic shaping.  shorewall-nft generates
.BR tc (8)
commands from this file via
.BR "shorewall\-nft generate\-tc" .

.SH FILE FORMAT
Location:
.I /etc/shorewall/tcinterfaces
(or inside a merged
.IR /etc/shorewall46/ ).
.PP
Columns are whitespace-separated.  Lines beginning with
.B #
are comments.

.TS
l l l.
Column	Required	Description
_
INTERFACE	yes	Interface name
TYPE	yes	Interface type (Ethernet, …)
IN_BANDWIDTH	yes	Ingress shaping bandwidth (e.g. 100mbit, 10gbit)
OUT_BANDWIDTH	yes	Egress shaping bandwidth
OPTIONS	no	Comma-separated qdisc options
.TE

.SS OPTIONS
.TP
.B htb
Use the HTB (Hierarchical Token Bucket) qdisc.  This is the default for
most configurations.
.TP
.B hfsc
Use the HFSC (Hierarchical Fair Service Curve) qdisc.  Provides strict
latency guarantees for real-time traffic classes.
.TP
.B cake
Use the CAKE (Common Applications Kept Enhanced) qdisc.  Single-qdisc
AQM with built-in FQ and overhead compensation.
.TP
.BI overhead= N
Per-packet overhead in bytes to add when accounting bandwidth (accounts
for Ethernet/ATM encapsulation).  Typical: 14 (Ethernet), 8 (PPPoE+ETH).
.TP
.BI mtu= N
MTU of the link, used for burst-size calculations.  Default: 1514.
.TP
.BI mpu= N
Minimum packet unit (minimum packet size counted, in bytes).
.TP
.B linklayer=atm
Account for ATM cell padding overhead (53-byte cells).
.PP
The live-apply path is
.BR apply\-tc ;
this file is also consumed by
.B generate\-tc
to produce a portable shell script.
Both paths use pyroute2 internally — no
.BR tc (8)
binary is required.

.SH EXAMPLES
.RS
.nf
#INTERFACE  TYPE      IN_BANDWIDTH  OUT_BANDWIDTH  OPTIONS
eth0        Ethernet  100mbit       10mbit
eth1        Ethernet  1gbit         1gbit          htb,overhead=14
pppoe0      Ethernet  20mbit        5mbit          htb,overhead=8,linklayer=atm
.fi
.RE

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR shorewall\-nft (8),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-tcdevices (5),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-tcclasses (5)

.SH AUTHOR
André Valentin <avalentin@marcant.net>

.SH BUGS
Report bugs to the project issue tracker.
