.TH SHOREWALL-NFT-SIMLAB-COLLECT 1 "2026-04-24" "shorewall-nft 1.10.2" "General Commands"
.SH NAME
simlab-collect.sh \- capture a firewall's live topology + netfilter snapshot for shorewall-nft-simlab

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B tools/simlab-collect.sh
[\fB\-\-output\fR \fIDIR\fR]
[\fB\-\-host\fR \fINAME\fR]
[\fB\-h\fR | \fB\-\-help\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION
Captures a directory compatible with
.B shorewall-nft simulate \-\-data
(and the underlying
.BR shorewall\-nft\-simlab (1)).
Designed to run
.I on the live firewall
as a normal user: Tier 1 captures (addresses, routes, policy rules,
link metadata, bird / FRR RIB) are read from rtnetlink or world-
readable files and require no special privilege. Tier 2 captures
(iptables-save / ip6tables-save / nft / ipset / conntrack) require
CAP_NET_ADMIN; when the script runs as non-root those captures are
skipped with a note in
.IR manifest.txt .

The script never modifies any kernel or filesystem state.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-\-output " " \fIDIR\fR
Directory to create and populate.  Default:
.BI "./simlab-dump-<host>-<UTC>" .
.TP
.BR \-\-host " " \fINAME\fR
Hostname label for
.IR manifest.txt .
Default:
.BR hostname\ -s .
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show the usage help and exit.

.SH OUTPUT FILES
.SS Tier 1 \(em unprivileged
.TP
.B ip4add \fR/\fB ip6add
Output of
.B ip addr show
and
.BR "ip -6 addr show" .
Consumed by simlab's
.B load_fw_state
to build its TUN/TAP topology.
.TP
.B ip4routes \fR/\fB ip6routes
Main routing table (v4) and all-table (v6) dumps.
.TP
.B ip4rules \fR/\fB ip6rules
Policy-routing rule table dumps.
.TP
.B ip4routes-all
Per-table v4 route breakdown (all routing tables combined).
.TP
.B rt_tables
Copy of
.IR /etc/iproute2/rt_tables ;
symbolic names for the numeric table IDs referenced in
.IR ip[46]rules .
.TP
.B ip-link-details
.B "ip -details link show"
\(em includes device kind (gre, gretap, vlan, bond, veth, \&...),
master, flags.
.TP
.B bird-routes.txt \fR/\fB frr-routes.txt
Best-effort dump of bird / FRR pre-FIB RIB. Missing if the routing
daemon is absent or the caller lacks socket permissions.

.SS Tier 2 \(em privileged (skipped when run as non-root)
.TP
.B iptables.txt \fR/\fB ip6tables.txt
Output of
.BR iptables\-save " / " ip6tables\-save .
Uses the
.I "iptables-save(8)"
syntax expected by simlab's rule-derivation pipeline.
.TP
.B ebtables.save \fR/\fB arptables.save
Bridge-layer and ARP filter dumps (rare but captured when the
relevant binaries are installed).
.TP
.B nft\-ruleset.nft
Output of
.BR "nft list ruleset" :
the complete native nftables ruleset including sets, maps and
flowtables.
.TP
.B ipset.save
Classic
.BR ipset (8)
storage (distinct from nft sets).
.TP
.B conntrack.txt
.B "conntrack -L"
\(em a snapshot of active flows. Diagnostic only; not consumed by
simlab.

.SS Metadata
.TP
.B manifest.txt
One
.BI "LABEL : STATUS"
line per capture
.RB "(" captured ", " skipped\-permission ", " skipped\-binary\-absent ")"
followed by host / timestamp / kernel / effective-UID / collector
version lines.

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Unprivileged snapshot (default):
.nf
.RI "$ ./tools/simlab-collect.sh --output /tmp/fw-snapshot"
.fi
.TP
Full snapshot including netfilter dumps:
.nf
.RI "$ sudo ./tools/simlab-collect.sh --output /tmp/fw-snapshot"
.fi
.TP
Capture a per-VRF netns:
.nf
.RI "$ sudo ip netns exec fw1 ./tools/simlab-collect.sh --output /tmp/fw1"
.fi
.TP
Feed the snapshot to
.B "shorewall-nft simulate" :
.nf
.RI "$ shorewall-nft simulate --config-dir /etc/shorewall46 --data /tmp/fw-snapshot"
.fi

.SH EXIT STATUS
Exits 0 unless
.B mkdir
or the manifest-write fails.  Individual capture failures are
recorded in the manifest and do not affect the exit status.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR shorewall\-nft (8),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-simlab (1),
.BR iptables\-save (8),
.BR nft (8),
.BR conntrack (8),
.BR ipset (8),
.BR ip\-rule (8),
.BR ip\-route (8).
