.TH SHOREWALL-NFT-NFACCT 5 "2026-04-24" "shorewall-nft 1.11.0" "File Formats"
.SH NAME
shorewall\-nft\-nfacct \- named nftables counter objects for shorewall-nft
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I nfacct
file declares named packet/byte counter objects in the
.I inet shorewall
nft table.  Named counters survive firewall restarts (unlike per-rule
counters) and can be reset independently.  They are visible via
.B shorewall\-nft counters
and the
.BR shorewalld (8)
Prometheus exporter.

.SH FILE FORMAT
Location:
.I /etc/shorewall/nfacct
(or inside a merged
.IR /etc/shorewall46/ ).
.PP
Columns are whitespace-separated.  Lines beginning with
.B #
are comments.

.TS
l l l.
Column	Required	Description
_
NAME	yes	Counter name (alphanumeric and underscores)
PACKETS	no	Initial packet count (default: 0)
BYTES	no	Initial byte count (default: 0)
.TE

Counter names must be unique within the config.  They are referenced from
.I rules
using the
.B counter
option in the
.B ACTION
column.

.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Declare named counters for different traffic classes:
.RS
.nf
#NAME           PACKETS  BYTES
web_traffic     0        0
ssh_inbound     0        0
icmp_traffic    0        0
.fi
.RE

.SH NFSET / DNS TOKENS
The
.I nfacct
file declares counter names only — it contains no source or destination
address columns.
.BR nfset: ,
.BR dns: ,
and
.BR dnsr:
tokens are not applicable here.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR shorewall\-nft (8),
.BR shorewalld (8),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-accounting (5),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-rules (5)

.SH AUTHOR
André Valentin <avalentin@marcant.net>

.SH BUGS
Report bugs to the project issue tracker.
