.TH SHOREWALL-NFT 8 "2026-04-20" "shorewall-nft 1.10.0" "System Administration"
.SH NAME
shorewall\-nft \- nftables-native firewall compiler with Shorewall-compatible configuration
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B shorewall\-nft
.RI [ GLOBAL\-OPTIONS ]
.I COMMAND
.RI [ COMMAND\-OPTIONS ]
.RI [ ARGS ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B shorewall\-nft
is a Python implementation of the Shorewall firewall compiler that emits
native nftables rulesets instead of iptables rules.  It reads the same
configuration file format as classic Shorewall and produces semantically
equivalent firewall behaviour on modern Linux kernels (nft 0.9.6 / kernel
5.10 or later).

Configuration lives under one of three directory trees:
.TP
.I /etc/shorewall/
Legacy IPv4-only config directory (Shorewall v4 layout).
.TP
.I /etc/shorewall6/
Legacy IPv6-only config directory (Shorewall v6 layout).
.TP
.I /etc/shorewall46/
Merged dual-stack directory produced by
.BR merge\-config .
Takes precedence over the individual v4/v6 directories when present.

The tool emits a single
.I inet shorewall
nft table that carries both IPv4 and IPv6 rules.  No separate ip and ip6
tables are created.

.SH GLOBAL OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-version
Print the installed version and exit.
.TP
.B \-q
Quiet mode — suppress informational messages.
.TP
.B \-v
Verbose mode.  Pass twice
.RB ( \-vv )
for debug-level output.
.TP
.BI \-\-override\-json " JSON_OR_@FILE"
Structured JSON merged over every parsed config file at runtime.  Accepts a
literal JSON string, an
.B @path
argument (reads JSON or YAML; YAML auto-detected by
.I .yaml
/
.I .yml
extension), or
.B \-
(reads from stdin).  See
.IR docs/cli/override\-json.md .
.TP
.BI \-\-override " FILE=JSON_OR_@FILE"
Per-file overlay entry, repeatable.  For example
.B \-\-override rules=@extra.json
merges the JSON in
.I extra.json
under the
.B rules
top-level key.  Mergeable with
.B \-\-override\-json
(later entry wins on key collision).
.TP
.B \-\-help
Show a brief command listing and exit.

.SH CONFIG DIRECTORY FLAGS
Most commands that compile or read configuration accept the following
mutually exclusive directory-selection flags.  When none are given the
command uses
.I /etc/shorewall46
if it exists, else
.IR /etc/shorewall .

.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-config\-dir " \fIDIR\fR"
Explicit merged dual-stack config directory (overrides the
.I /etc/shorewall46
default).
.TP
.BI \-\-config\-dir\-v4 " DIR"
Explicit IPv4-only config directory.  Auto-detects a v6 sibling
unless
.B \-\-no\-auto\-v6
is also given.
.TP
.BI \-\-config\-dir\-v6 " DIR"
Explicit IPv6-only config directory.  Combine with
.B \-\-config\-dir\-v4
for fully explicit dual-stack mode.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-auto\-v4
Disable auto-detection of a v4 sibling directory (IPv6-only mode).
.TP
.B \-\-no\-auto\-v6
Disable auto-detection of a v6 sibling directory (IPv4-only mode).

.SH LIFECYCLE COMMANDS

.SS start [\fIDIRECTORY\fR] [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
Compile the configuration and load it into the kernel using
.BR nft (8).
The loaded table is named
.IR "inet shorewall" .
On success the firewall is live.

.PP
.RS
Options (in addition to the config directory flags):
.TP
.BI \-\-netns " NAMESPACE"
Load the ruleset into the named network namespace instead of the current one.
.TP
.BI \-\-shorewalld\-socket " PATH"
Path to the shorewalld control socket.  Default:
.IR /run/shorewalld/control.sock .
.TP
.BI \-\-instance\-name " NAME"
Override the shorewalld instance name (default: taken from
.B INSTANCE_NAME
in
.IR shorewall.conf ,
then the netns name, then the config directory basename).
.TP
.BR \-\-seed " / " \-\-no\-seed
Request a seed from shorewalld so DNS-driven nft sets are pre-populated
before traffic arrives.  Default: enabled if
.B shorewall.conf
does not specify
.BR SHOREWALLD_SEED_ENABLED .
.TP
.BI \-\-seed\-timeout " DURATION"
How long to wait for the seed response (e.g.
.BR 10s ).
Default: 10 s.
.TP
.BR \-\-seed\-wait\-passive " / " \-\-no\-seed\-wait\-passive
Wait the full seed timeout for passive sources (dnstap/pbdns) to
warm up before declaring the seed ready.  Default: enabled.
.RE

.SS restart [\fIDIRECTORY\fR] [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
Recompile the configuration and atomically replace the currently loaded
ruleset.  Accepts the same flags as
.BR start .

.SS reload [\fIDIRECTORY\fR] [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
Alias for
.BR restart .
nftables performs atomic table replacement natively so there is no
distinction between reload and restart.

.SS stop [\fIDIRECTORY\fR] [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
Remove the running
.I inet shorewall
table.  If the configuration contains a
.I routestopped
file, the compiled
.I inet shorewall_stopped
table is loaded so that the listed (interface, host) pairs remain
reachable while the firewall is down.  Without
.I routestopped
the kernel uses its default policy (typically wide-open).

Accepts
.BR \-\-netns ,
.BR \-\-shorewalld\-socket ,
.BR \-\-instance\-name ,
and the config directory flags.

.SS clear [\fB\-\-netns\fR \fINS\fR]
Flush all firewall rules and set the forward policy to
.BR ACCEPT .
Useful for emergency access restoration without a full stop.

.SS save [\fIFILENAME\fR] [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
Save the currently loaded nft ruleset to
.IR FILENAME .
If no filename is given the output goes to stdout.

.RS
.TP
.B \-\-counters
Include current packet and byte counter values in the saved file.
.TP
.BI \-\-netns " NAMESPACE"
Read the ruleset from the named network namespace.
.RE

.SS restore \fIFILENAME\fR [\fB\-\-netns\fR \fINS\fR]
Atomically replace the loaded ruleset with the contents of
.IR FILENAME ,
which must be an nft script produced by
.BR save .

.SS status [\fB\-\-netns\fR \fINS\fR]
Show whether the firewall is running, the chain and rule count, and a
config-hash drift warning if the on-disk configuration has changed since
the ruleset was loaded.

.SH INSPECTION COMMANDS

.SS show [\fIWHAT\fR] [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.SS list [\fIWHAT\fR] [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.SS dump [\fIWHAT\fR] [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.SS ls [\fIWHAT\fR] [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
All four names are aliases for the same command.  Shows firewall
information.
.I WHAT
selects the section:
.B zones
(default),
.BR policies ,
.BR config ,
.BR connections .

.RS
.TP
.B \-x
Show exact counter values (packets and bytes) rather than human-friendly
abbreviations.
.TP
.BI \-\-netns " NAMESPACE"
Query the named network namespace.
.RE

.SS counters [\fB\-\-netns\fR \fINS\fR]
List all named counter values (packets and bytes) for the currently loaded
ruleset.  Named counters are inserted by
.BR debug .

.SS reset [\fICHAINS\fR] [\fB\-\-netns\fR \fINS\fR]
Reset packet and byte counters.  If no chain names are given all counters
are reset.

.SS capabilities [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
Probe and report the nftables capabilities of the running kernel: which
statement types (flowtable, vmap, ct zone tag, concat-map DNAT) are
available.

.RS
.TP
.BI \-\-netns " NAMESPACE"
Run the probe in the named network namespace.
.TP
.B \-\-json
Output the capability report as JSON.
.RE

.SS explain\-nft\-features [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
Show the built-in nft feature catalogue with syntax examples, categorised
by area (Sets, NAT, IPv6, Conntrack, …).

.RS
.TP
.B \-\-probe
Test each feature against the running kernel and mark it as available or
unavailable.
.TP
.BI \-\-category " NAME"
Filter the catalogue to the named category (e.g.
.BR Sets ,
.BR NAT ,
.BR IPv6 ).
.TP
.B \-\-json
Emit the catalogue as JSON.
.RE

.SH COMPILATION COMMANDS

.SS check [\fIDIRECTORY\fR] [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
Compile without applying.  Validates configuration syntax and checks
kernel capability requirements.  Exits non-zero on error.

.RS
.TP
.B \-\-skip\-caps
Skip the kernel capability probe.  Use when running in a container or
CI environment that does not have an active nftables instance.
.RE

Also accepts the config directory flags.

.SS compile [\fIDIRECTORY\fR] [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
Compile the configuration to an nft script and print it to stdout or
write it to a file.

.RS
.TP
.BI \-o " FILE"
Write the nft script to
.I FILE
instead of stdout.
.RE

Also accepts the config directory flags.

.SS verify [\fIDIRECTORY\fR] [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
Run the triangle verifier: compile the configuration and compare the
resulting nft ruleset against an
.BR iptables\-save (8)
baseline for semantic equivalence.

.RS
.TP
.BI \-\-iptables " DUMP"
Path to the
.B iptables\-save
dump to compare against.
.RB ( Required .)
.RE

Also accepts the config directory flags.

.SS simulate [\fIDIRECTORY\fR] [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
Run packet-level verification in three network namespaces using Scapy.
Test cases are derived from the iptables baseline; the tool reports
.I fail_drops
(packets that the iptables baseline accepted but the nft ruleset dropped)
and
.I fail_accepts
(packets that the iptables baseline dropped but the nft ruleset accepted)
separately.

.RS
.TP
.BI \-\-iptables " DUMP"
Path to the
.B iptables\-save
dump (ground truth).
.RB ( Required .)
.TP
.BI \-\-ip6tables " DUMP"
Path to the
.B ip6tables\-save
dump for IPv6 tests.
.TP
.BI \-\-target " IP"
Single target IP to test.
.TP
.BI \-\-targets " LIST"
Comma-separated list of target IPs, or
.B @FILE
with one IP per line.
.TP
.BI \-\-targets\-v6 " LIST"
Comma-separated list or
.B @FILE
of IPv6 target addresses.  Requires
.BR \-\-ip6tables .
.TP
.BI \-\-src\-iface " IFACE"
Override the source-zone interface name in the firewall netns (default:
.BR bond1 ).
.TP
.BI \-\-dst\-iface " IFACE"
Override the destination-zone interface name in the firewall netns
(default:
.BR bond0.20 ).
.TP
.B \-\-all\-zones
Multi-zone topology: create one veth pair per zone and derive test cases
across every src\(->dst chain in the iptables dump.
.TP
.BI \-n ", " \-\-max\-tests " N"
Maximum test cases per target IP.
.TP
.BI \-\-seed " N"
Random seed for sampling.
.TP
.B \-v
Show all test results (not just failures).
.TP
.BI \-j ", " \-\-parallel " N"
Run N test threads in parallel.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-trace
Disable nft trace logging during the simulation run.
.RE

Also accepts the config directory flags.

.SS migrate [\fIDIRECTORY\fR] [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
Verify migration readiness from classic Shorewall to shorewall-nft.

.RS
.TP
.BI \-\-iptables " DUMP"
Optional iptables-save dump for triangle verification during migration.
.TP
.BI \-o " FILE"
Write the compiled nft script to
.IR FILE .
.TP
.B \-\-dry\-run
Compile and run
.B nft \-c
syntax check only; do not load rules into the kernel.
.RE

Also accepts the config directory flags.

See also
.BR shorewall\-nft\-migrate (8)
for the standalone migration tool.

.SH DYNAMIC BLACKLIST COMMANDS

.SS drop \fIADDRESSES\fR [\fB\-\-netns\fR \fINS\fR]
Silently drop all traffic from one or more addresses by adding them to
the
.I shorewall_blacklist
nft set.

.SS reject \fIADDRESSES\fR [\fB\-\-netns\fR \fINS\fR]
Reject traffic from one or more addresses (sends a TCP RST or ICMP
unreachable reply).

.SS allow \fIADDRESSES\fR [\fB\-\-netns\fR \fINS\fR]
Remove one or more addresses from the dynamic blacklist.

.SS blacklist \fIADDRESS\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
Add an address to the dynamic blacklist with an optional expiry timeout.

.RS
.TP
.BR \-t ", " \-\-timeout " \fIDURATION\fR"
Expiry timeout.  Accepts duration strings such as
.BR 1h ,
.BR 30m ,
.BR 1d .
.TP
.BI \-\-netns " NAMESPACE"
Target the named network namespace.
.RE

.SH PLUGIN COMMANDS

.SS plugins [list] [\fB\-c\fR \fIDIR\fR]
List all loaded plugins with their names, versions, and priorities.  Uses
the configuration directory to locate
.IR plugins.conf .

.SS lookup \fIIP\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
Query all configured plugins for metadata about an IP address (geolocation,
device inventory, threat intelligence, etc.).

.RS
.TP
.BI \-c ", " \-\-config\-dir " PATH"
Config directory containing
.IR plugins.conf .
.TP
.B \-\-json
Output raw JSON for machine consumption.
.RE

.SS enrich [\fIDIRECTORY\fR] [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
Run plugin enrichment in-place on a config directory: rewrites
.B ?COMMENT
blocks with annotations from all configured plugins.  Creates
.I .bak
backups unless
.B \-\-no\-backup
is passed.

.RS
.TP
.B \-\-no\-backup
Skip
.I .bak
file creation.
.TP
.B \-\-dry\-run
Preview changes without modifying disk (prints a unified diff).
.RE

.SH GENERATOR COMMANDS

.SS apply\-tc [\fIDIRECTORY\fR] [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
Configure kernel qdiscs, HTB classes, and fwmark filters declared in the
.IR tcdevices ,
.IR tcclasses ,
and
.I tcfilters
config files.  Uses pyroute2 to open a netlink socket directly — no
.BR tc (8)
binary is required.

.RS
.TP
.BI \-\-netns " NAME"
Apply inside the named network namespace.  pyroute2's
.B IPRoute(netns=NAME)
constructor is used to bind the netlink socket directly to the target
namespace; no
.B ip\-netns\-exec
fork is performed.
.TP
.B \-\-dry\-run
Parse and validate the TC config, then print the planned operations as a
bulleted list.  Nothing is applied to the kernel.
.RE

Accepts the config directory flags.
.PP
Idempotence: existing qdiscs are deleted then re-added before each run so
that re-running the command after a config change is safe (same semantics
as
.BR generate\-tc ).
The preferred apply path; use
.B generate\-tc
as a portable fallback or for human review before applying.

.SS generate\-systemd [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
Print a systemd service unit to stdout (or write to a directory with
.BR \-o ).

.RS
.TP
.B \-\-with\-netns
Generate a templated unit
.RB ( shorewall\-nft@.service )
for per-netns deployments instead of the single-instance unit.
.TP
.BI \-o ", " \-\-output\-dir " PATH"
Write the generated unit file(s) to
.I PATH
instead of stdout.
.RE

.SS generate\-sysctl [\fIDIRECTORY\fR]
Print a sysctl configuration script derived from interface options in the
config (e.g. ip_forward, rp_filter).  Pipe to
.B sysctl \-p \-
or write to
.IR /etc/sysctl.d/ .
Accepts the config directory flags.

.SS generate\-tc [\fIDIRECTORY\fR]
Print
.BR tc (8)
commands to set up the traffic control classes and qdiscs declared in the
.I tcdevices
and
.I tcclasses
config files.  Accepts the config directory flags.
.PP
This is the portable fallback path (outputs a shell script that can be
inspected or run manually).  Use
.B apply\-tc
to apply the configuration directly via pyroute2 without a
.BR tc (8)
binary.

.SS generate\-iproute2\-rules [\fIDIRECTORY\fR]
Print a shell script of
.BR ip (8)
route and rule commands equivalent to what
.B apply\-tc
/
.B start
would apply via pyroute2 for the
.IR providers ,
.IR routes ,
and
.I rtrules
configuration files.  Useful for human review before applying, or as a
portable fallback when pyroute2 is unavailable.
.PP
The live-apply counterpart is
.BR runtime.apply.apply_iproute2_rules() ,
which uses pyroute2 directly (zero shell-outs).  Accepts the config
directory flags.

.SS generate\-set\-loader [\fIDIRECTORY\fR]
Print a shell script that loads external sets (GeoIP prefix files, ipset
exports) into nft at startup.  Run this script after
.BR start .
Accepts the config directory flags.

.SS generate\-conntrackd [\fIDIRECTORY\fR] [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
Print a conntrackd.conf fragment for an HA firewall pair.  Honours
.B CT_ZONE_TAG_MASK
to build a Mark filter that replicates only zone bits across the sync
link, keeping routing and policy marks local to each node.

.RS
.TP
.BI \-\-sync\-iface " IFACE"
Interface used for the conntrackd sync link.  Defaults to
.B CONNTRACKD_IFACE
from
.IR shorewall.conf .
.TP
.BI \-\-peer\-ip " IP"
IPv4 address of the peer HA node on the sync link.
.TP
.BI \-\-local\-ip " IP"
IPv4 address of this node on the sync link.
.TP
.BI \-\-cluster\-ip " IP"
Shared virtual IP that HA failover moves between nodes.
.RE

Accepts the config directory flags.

.SH STRUCTURED CONFIG COMMANDS

.SS config export [\fIDIRECTORY\fR] [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
Dump a Shorewall config directory as a structured JSON or YAML blob.
Columnar files emit one object per row; rules and policy are nested under
their
.B ?SECTION
labels.

.RS
.TP
.BI \-\-format " FORMAT"
Output format:
.B json
(default) or
.B yaml
(requires PyYAML).
.TP
.BI \-o ", " \-\-output " PATH"
Write to FILE instead of stdout.  Extension auto-selects the format when
.B \-\-format
is not given.
.TP
.B \-\-include\-trace
Keep
.BR _file ,
.BR _lineno ,
.B _comment
diagnostic fields in the output.
.TP
.BI \-\-indent " N"
JSON indent level (ignored for YAML; default: 2).
.RE

.SS config import \fISOURCE\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
Validate a structured JSON/YAML config blob.  With
.B \-\-to
it writes the parsed config back as on-disk Shorewall files.

.RS
.TP
.BI \-\-format " FORMAT"
.BR json ,
.BR yaml ,
or
.B auto
(selects by file extension; default).
.TP
.BI \-\-to " PATH"
Target directory.  When given, the parsed blob is written back as
on-disk Shorewall files.
.TP
.B \-\-force
Overwrite the target directory even if it is not empty.
.TP
.B \-\-dry\-run
Parse and validate only; print a summary.  Implied when
.B \-\-to
is absent.
.RE

.SS config merge \fISOURCES\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
Merge one or more Shorewall config directories into a single unified
output directory.  Later sources extend earlier ones.

.RS
.TP
.BI \-\-to " PATH"
Target directory for the merged output.
.RB ( Required .)
.TP
.B \-\-force
Overwrite the target even if it exists and is non-empty.
.TP
.B \-\-provenance
Interleave
.B # from <file>:<lineno>
comments before each rule for audit traceability.
.TP
.BI \-\-config\-dir\-v6 " DIRECTORY"
Optional v6 sibling for the first source directory.
.RE

.SS config template \fISOURCE\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
Expand a multi-host text template: lines tagged with
.B @hostname
at column 1 are kept (with the tag stripped) only when the hostname
matches
.BR \-\-host ;
lines without a tag pass through unchanged.

.RS
.TP
.BI \-\-host " NAME"
Target host name.
.RB ( Required .)
.TP
.BI \-o ", " \-\-output " PATH"
Write to FILE instead of stdout.
.RE

.SH DIAGNOSTIC COMMANDS

.SS debug [\fIDIRECTORY\fR] [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
Temporarily load a debug-annotated ruleset: every rule receives a named
counter and a source-location comment.  The current ruleset is saved,
the debug ruleset is loaded, and a brief usage summary is printed.
Press Ctrl+C to restore the original ruleset.

.RS
.TP
.BI \-\-netns " NAMESPACE"
Load the debug ruleset in the named network namespace.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-restore
Do not restore the original ruleset on exit.
.TP
.BI \-\-trace " NFT_MATCH"
Auto-install a
.B meta nftrace set 1
rule in the input chain for the given nft match (e.g.
.BR "'ip saddr 198.51.100.1'" ).
The trace rule is removed when debug exits.
.RE

Also accepts the config directory flags.

.SS trace [\fB\-\-netns\fR \fINS\fR]
Run
.B nft monitor trace
to follow live packet tracing events.  Packets matched by a rule that
has
.B meta nftrace set 1
produce trace events on this stream.

.SS load\-sets [\fIDIRECTORY\fR] [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
Load external sets (GeoIP prefix files, ipset exports) into nft after
.BR start .
Uses libnftables' native JSON API when available (much faster for bulk
element loads); falls back to
.B nft \-f \-
text mode otherwise.

.RS
.TP
.BI \-\-netns " NAMESPACE"
Load sets into the named network namespace.
.TP
.BI \-\-geoip\-dir " DIR"
Directory containing GeoIP prefix files.
.RE

Also accepts the config directory flags.

.SS merge\-config \fISHOREWALL_DIR\fR [\fISHOREWALL6_DIR\fR] [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
Merge
.I /etc/shorewall
and
.I /etc/shorewall6
into a unified
.I /etc/shorewall46
directory.  If only the v4 directory is given the v6 sibling is
auto-detected by appending
.B 6
to the v4 directory name.

.RS
.TP
.BI \-o ", " \-\-output " PATH"
Output directory (default:
.IR <parent>/shorewall46 ).
.TP
.B \-\-guided
Interactive mode: prompt on each naming collision.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-plugins
Disable plugin enrichment even when
.I plugins.conf
is present.
.RE

.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/shorewall/
Legacy IPv4-only Shorewall config directory.
.TP
.I /etc/shorewall6/
Legacy IPv6-only Shorewall config directory.
.TP
.I /etc/shorewall46/
Merged dual-stack config directory.  Takes precedence when present.
.TP
.I /etc/shorewall/shorewall.conf
Primary settings file (FASTACCEPT, OPTIMIZE, LOGFILE, …).
.TP
.I /etc/shorewall/plugins.conf
Plugin registry in TOML format.
.TP
.I /etc/shorewall/plugins/*.toml
Per-plugin configuration files.
.TP
.I /etc/shorewall/dnsnames
Optional per-hostname TTL and set-size overrides for DNS-driven nft sets.
.TP
.I /etc/shorewall/dnsnames.compiled
Written by
.B shorewall\-nft start
from the
.B dns:
and
.B dnsr:
references in rules; read by
.BR shorewalld (8)
as its DNS-set allowlist.
.TP
.I /run/shorewalld/control.sock
shorewalld control socket (default path for
.BR \-\-shorewalld\-socket ).
.TP
.I /usr/share/doc/shorewall\-nft/
Package documentation (Markdown).
.TP
.I /usr/share/doc/shorewall\-nft/docs/reference/commands.json
Machine-readable CLI catalog (36 subcommands with help strings).

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B PYTHONPATH
Standard Python module search path.  Required when running from a
development checkout without a system install.
.TP
.B NFT_LOG_LEVEL
If set, overrides the log level for nftables library messages
(debug, info, warning, error).

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Compile error, verification failure, or runtime error.
.TP
.B 2
Argument parsing or configuration error.

.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Start the firewall using the default merged config directory:
.RS
.nf
shorewall\-nft start
.fi
.RE
.PP
Compile to stdout and inspect the generated nft script before loading:
.RS
.nf
shorewall\-nft compile \-c /etc/shorewall46 | less
.fi
.RE
.PP
Debug traffic from a specific host in a named network namespace:
.RS
.nf
shorewall\-nft debug /etc/shorewall46 \e
    \-\-netns fw \e
    \-\-trace 'ip saddr 198.51.100.5'
# (in another terminal)
shorewall\-nft trace \-\-netns fw
.fi
.RE
.PP
Merge dual-stack configs, then verify against an iptables baseline:
.RS
.nf
shorewall\-nft merge\-config /etc/shorewall /etc/shorewall6
shorewall\-nft verify \-\-iptables /tmp/iptables\-save.txt
.fi
.RE
.PP
Block an address for two hours, then lift the block:
.RS
.nf
shorewall\-nft blacklist 198.51.100.7 \-t 2h
# ... later ...
shorewall\-nft allow 198.51.100.7
.fi
.RE
.PP
Export the active config as YAML, edit, and write back:
.RS
.nf
shorewall\-nft config export \-\-format yaml \-o /tmp/fw\-config.yaml
# ... edit /tmp/fw\-config.yaml ...
shorewall\-nft config import \-\-to /etc/shorewall46 /tmp/fw\-config.yaml
shorewall\-nft restart
.fi
.RE
.PP
Generate and install the systemd unit, then enable it:
.RS
.nf
shorewall\-nft generate\-systemd \-o /etc/systemd/system/
systemctl daemon\-reload
systemctl enable \-\-now shorewall\-nft.service
.fi
.RE

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR shorewalld (8),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-migrate (8),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-simlab (8),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-stagelab (8),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-zones (5),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-rules (5),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-policy (5),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-nfsets (5),
.BR nft (8),
.BR ip\-netns (8)

Full documentation lives under
.I docs/
in the project repository and under
.I /usr/share/doc/shorewall\-nft/
after installation.

.SH AUTHOR
André Valentin <avalentin@marcant.net>

.SH BUGS
Report bugs to the project issue tracker.
For security vulnerabilities see
.IR SECURITY.md .
