.TH SHOREWALL-NFT-PROVIDERS 5 "2026-04-20" "shorewall-nft 1.10.0" "File Formats"
.SH NAME
shorewall\-nft\-providers \- multi-ISP provider definitions for shorewall-nft
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I providers
file defines multiple ISP uplinks (providers) for policy-based routing.
Each provider is assigned a routing table number and an nft connection mark.
Outbound traffic is marked and then routed into the provider's table using
.B ip rule
entries, which the compiler generates separately.

.SH FILE FORMAT
Location:
.I /etc/shorewall/providers
(or inside a merged
.IR /etc/shorewall46/ ).
.PP
Columns are whitespace-separated.  Lines beginning with
.B #
are comments.

.TS
l l l.
Column	Required	Description
_
NAME	yes	Provider name (also the ip route table name)
NUMBER	yes	Routing table number (2\(en252)
MARK	yes	Connection mark value for this provider
INTERFACE	yes	Outbound interface for this provider
GATEWAY	no	Gateway IP address (or detect)
OPTIONS	no	Comma-separated options (track, loose, …)
.TE

.SS Options
.TP
.B track
Track connections via connection marks so that replies follow the same
provider path (marks all new connections from this provider's interface).
.TP
.BI balance= N
Include this provider in the load-balancing pool with weight
.IR N .
Packets are distributed across balanced providers in proportion to their
weights using
.B ip route nexthop
multipath.
.TP
.BI fallback= N
Use this provider as a fallback when all
.B balance
providers are unavailable, with preference
.IR N
(lower = preferred).
.TP
.B loose
Do not fail at startup when the provider's interface is not up.  Useful
for providers that come and go (e.g. 4G modems).
.TP
.B optional
Synonym for
.B loose
(upstream Shorewall compatibility alias).
.TP
.B persistent
Maintain per-source-IP provider assignment (sticky sessions) even when
the provider's interface cycles.
.TP
.B primary
Mark this provider as the primary; it is used first before other
.B balance
providers when the primary is available.
.TP
.B tproxy
Enable transparent proxy support: traffic from this provider is diverted
to a local listener via nft TPROXY before routing.

.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Two-ISP configuration with tracking:
.RS
.nf
#NAME   NUMBER  MARK  INTERFACE  GATEWAY     OPTIONS
isp1    1       1     eth0       203.0.113.1  track
isp2    2       2     eth1       198.51.100.1 track,fallback
.fi
.RE
.PP
Load-balanced dual-ISP:
.RS
.nf
isp1    1       1     eth0       203.0.113.1  track,balance
isp2    2       2     eth1       198.51.100.1 track,balance
.fi
.RE

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR shorewall\-nft (8),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-routes (5),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-rtrules (5),
.BR ip\-rule (8)

.SH AUTHOR
André Valentin <avalentin@marcant.net>

.SH BUGS
Report bugs to the project issue tracker.
