.TH SHOREWALL-NFT-MANGLE 5 "2026-04-25" "shorewall-nft 1.10.2" "File Formats"
.SH NAME
shorewall\-nft\-mangle \- packet mark (mangle) rules for shorewall-nft
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I mangle
file defines rules that set packet marks or connection marks on matching
traffic.  Marks are used to implement policy-based routing, traffic shaping,
and quality-of-service classification.

The compiler processes this file together with
.I tcrules
and emits
.B meta mark set
and
.B ct mark set
rules in the
.B mangle
chain (nft priority
.BR \-150 ).

.SH FILE FORMAT
Location:
.I /etc/shorewall/mangle
(or inside a merged
.IR /etc/shorewall46/ ).
.PP
Columns are whitespace-separated.  Lines beginning with
.B #
are comments.

.TS
l l l.
Column	Required	Description
_
ACTION	yes	Mark or divert action: MARK(N), CONNMARK(N), RESTORE, SAVE, DSCP(...), CLASSIFY(...), TPROXY(PORT[,ADDR]), DUP(ADDR[,DEV]), or a bare integer mark value (decimal or 0x-hex). Anything else is logged at WARNING level and the rule is skipped.
SOURCE	yes	Source zone:address or CIDR
DEST	yes	Destination zone:address or CIDR
PROTO	no	Protocol filter
DPORT	no	Destination port filter
SPORT	no	Source port filter
USER	no	User/group match
TEST	no	Connmark test expression
LENGTH	no	Packet length range
TOS	no	TOS/DSCP value
CONNBYTES	no	Conntrack bytes matched
HELPER	no	Conntrack helper match
HEADERS	no	IPv6 extension header match
PROBABILITY	no	Probabilistic mark (0.0\(en1.0)
DSCP	no	DSCP value to set
STATE	no	Connection state match
TIME	no	Time range
SWITCH	no	Runtime switch name
.TE

.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Mark all HTTP/HTTPS traffic for QoS:
.RS
.nf
#ACTION  SOURCE  DEST  PROTO  DPORT
1        all     all   tcp    80,443
.fi
.RE
.PP
Save connection mark on new connections:
.RS
.nf
SAVE     all     all
.fi
.RE
.PP
Restore mark from connection on established traffic:
.RS
.nf
RESTORE  all     all
.fi
.RE
.PP
Transparent-proxy divert (HTTP traffic to local Squid on port 3128):
.RS
.nf
#ACTION                  SOURCE  DEST  PROTO  DPORT
TPROXY(3128,127.0.0.1)   loc     all   tcp    80
.fi
.RE
The kernel TPROXY module routes the diverted packet to a local
listener on the given address and port.  The caller is responsible
for the routing-table glue
.RB ( "ip rule add fwmark <mark> lookup <table>" )
\(em compose with a separate MARK action when fwmark-based redirection
is required.  Gated by the
.B has_tproxy_stmt
capability; see
.BR shorewall\-nft (8)
.B capabilities
for the probed kernel feature set.
.PP
Tap-copy a packet to a remote analyser without disturbing the
production flow:
.RS
.nf
#ACTION                    SOURCE  DEST  PROTO  DPORT
DUP(198.51.100.7)          all     all   tcp    25
DUP(198.51.100.7,eth0)     all     all   udp    53
.fi
.RE
The
.B DUP
action duplicates the packet to the listed address; the original
packet continues unchanged through the remainder of the chain, so
DUP is non-terminal.  The optional second parameter forces the
copy out via a specific outgoing device, bypassing the routing
table.  Gated by the
.B has_dup
capability.  The companion zero-copy
.B fwd
statement is netdev-ingress only and is not yet exposed via the
mangle ACTION column \(em it requires a dedicated netdev table
the mangle file does not currently produce.

.SH NFSET / DNS TOKENS
The SOURCE and DEST columns accept
.BR nfset:<name> ,
.BR dns:<hostname> ,
and
.BR dnsr:<hostname>
tokens — see
.BR shorewall\-nft\-rules (5)
and
.BR shorewall\-nft\-nfsets (5)
for the full grammar.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR shorewall\-nft (8),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-rules (5),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-nfsets (5),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-providers (5)

.SH AUTHOR
André Valentin <avalentin@marcant.net>

.SH BUGS
Report bugs to the project issue tracker.
