.TH SHOREWALL-NFT-INTERFACES 5 "2026-04-24" "shorewall-nft 1.10.2" "File Formats"
.SH NAME
shorewall\-nft\-interfaces \- network interface zone assignments for shorewall-nft
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I interfaces
file assigns network interfaces to zones.  The compiler uses this
assignment to build the dispatch rules in the
.I inet shorewall
nft table that route packets into the correct zone-pair chains based on
.B iifname
and
.BR oifname .

.SH FILE FORMAT
Location:
.I /etc/shorewall/interfaces
(or inside a merged
.IR /etc/shorewall46/ ).
.PP
Lines beginning with
.B #
are comments.  Blank lines are ignored.  Columns are whitespace-separated.

.TS
l l l.
Column	Required	Description
_
ZONE	yes	Zone name (must be declared in zones file)
INTERFACE	yes	Interface name or pattern (wildcards: +)
BROADCAST	no	Broadcast address or detect or -
OPTIONS	no	Comma-separated interface options
.TE

.SS Common options
.TP
.B dhcp
Allow DHCP traffic on this interface.
.TP
.B nosmurfs
Enable smurf attack filtering.
.TP
.B routeback
Allow packets arriving and leaving on the same interface.
.TP
.B bridge
Treat the interface as a bridge.
.TP
.B optional
Do not fail if the interface does not exist at firewall start time.
.TP
.B tcpflags
Check for TCP flag anomalies.
.TP
.BI maclist[= file ]
Enable MAC-address filtering on this interface.
.TP
.BI nets= NETWORKS
Restrict the zone to these networks on this interface.
.TP
.BI mss= N
Clamp TCP MSS to
.I N
bytes on this interface.  Emits an nft rule in the forward chain that
rewrites the MSS option on TCP SYN packets.
.TP
.B sourceroute
Accept source-routed packets on this interface
.RB ( net.ipv4.conf.\fIIFACE\fR .accept_source_route=1 ).
Generated by
.BR "shorewall-nft generate-sysctl" .
.TP
.BI proxyarp[= 1 ]
Enable proxy ARP on this interface
.RB ( net.ipv4.conf.\fIIFACE\fR .proxy_arp=1 ).
.TP
.BI routefilter [= VALUE ]
Enable reverse-path filtering (rp_filter) on this interface.
.RS
Without a value (or with
.BR =1 ),
strict mode is set
.RB ( net.ipv4.conf. \fIIFACE\fR .rp_filter=1 ).
.BR =2
selects loose mode; the option is absent or
.B noroutefilter
sets
.BR =0 .
The generated sysctl line is written by
.BR "shorewall-nft generate-sysctl" .
If the global
.B ROUTE_FILTER
setting in
.I shorewall.conf
is also enabled it sets
.B net.ipv4.conf.all.rp_filter
and
.BR net.ipv4.conf.default.rp_filter ;
the kernel uses the maximum of the global and per-interface values.
.PP
At OPTIMIZE level 1 and above, the compiler uses this flag as a heuristic to
elide rules whose source addresses cannot arrive on the interface — the kernel
would drop them via rp_filter anyway.
.RE
.TP
.B logmartians
Log packets with impossible source addresses
.RB ( net.ipv4.conf.\fIIFACE\fR .log_martians=1 ).
.TP
.B arp_filter
Enable ARP filtering: respond to ARP requests only for addresses assigned
to the receiving interface
.RB ( net.ipv4.conf.\fIIFACE\fR .arp_filter=1 ).
.TP
.BI arp_ignore[= N ]
Set ARP ignore mode
.RB ( net.ipv4.conf.\fIIFACE\fR .arp_ignore=\fIN\fR ).
Value 1 (default when the option is bare) ignores ARP requests unless the
target IP is assigned to the receiving interface.
.TP
.B forward
Enable packet forwarding on this interface
.RB ( net.ipv4.conf.\fIIFACE\fR .forwarding=1 ).
.TP
.B accept_ra
Accept IPv6 Router Advertisements on this interface
.RB ( net.ipv6.conf.\fIIFACE\fR .accept_ra=1 ).
Relevant for uplink interfaces in dual-stack deployments.

.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Typical two-interface firewall:
.RS
.nf
#ZONE   INTERFACE   BROADCAST   OPTIONS
net     eth0        detect      tcpflags,nosmurfs
loc     eth1        detect      dhcp
.fi
.RE
.PP
Bond interface with VLAN sub-interfaces:
.RS
.nf
net     bond0.10    detect      tcpflags,nosmurfs
loc     bond0.20    detect
mgmt    bond0.99    detect
.fi
.RE
.PP
Wildcard interface pattern for PPP links:
.RS
.nf
net     ppp+        detect      tcpflags
.fi
.RE

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR shorewall\-nft (8),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-zones (5),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-hosts (5),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-rules (5)

.SH AUTHOR
André Valentin <avalentin@marcant.net>

.SH BUGS
Report bugs to the project issue tracker.
