.TH SHOREWALL-NFT-TCRULES 5 "2026-04-24" "shorewall-nft 1.11.0" "File Formats"
.SH NAME
shorewall\-nft\-tcrules \- mark-setting rules for traffic control for shorewall-nft
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I tcrules
file sets packet marks used to classify traffic into
.I tcclasses
traffic shaping classes.  The compiler processes this file together with
.I mangle
and emits
.B meta mark set
rules in the nft mangle chain.

For new configurations prefer
.IR shorewall\-nft\-mangle (5),
which has an expanded column set.
.I tcrules
is retained for Shorewall compatibility.

.SH FILE FORMAT
Location:
.I /etc/shorewall/tcrules
(or inside a merged
.IR /etc/shorewall46/ ).
.PP
Columns are whitespace-separated.  Lines beginning with
.B #
are comments.

.TS
l l l.
Column	Required	Description
_
MARK	yes	Mark action: MARK(N), CONNMARK(N), RESTORE, SAVE, DSCP(...), CLASSIFY(...), or a bare integer mark value. Unrecognised tokens are logged at WARNING level and the rule is skipped.
SOURCE	yes	Source address, zone:address, or CIDR
DEST	yes	Destination address, zone:address, or CIDR
PROTO	no	Protocol filter
DPORT	no	Destination port filter
SPORT	no	Source port filter
USER	no	User/group match
TEST	no	Connmark test expression
LENGTH	no	Packet length range
TOS	no	TOS value match
CONNBYTES	no	Conntrack bytes matched
HELPER	no	Conntrack helper match
HEADERS	no	IPv6 extension header match
.TE

.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Mark VoIP traffic with mark 1 (highest priority class):
.RS
.nf
#MARK  SOURCE  DEST  PROTO  DPORT
1      all     all   udp    5060,10000:20000
.fi
.RE
.PP
Mark bulk FTP data with mark 3 (lowest priority):
.RS
.nf
3      all     all   tcp    21
.fi
.RE

.SH NFSET / DNS TOKENS
The SOURCE and DEST columns accept
.BR nfset:<name> ,
.BR dns:<hostname> ,
and
.BR dnsr:<hostname>
tokens — see
.BR shorewall\-nft\-rules (5)
and
.BR shorewall\-nft\-nfsets (5)
for the full grammar.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR shorewall\-nft (8),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-mangle (5),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-nfsets (5),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-tcdevices (5),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-tcclasses (5)

.SH AUTHOR
André Valentin <avalentin@marcant.net>

.SH BUGS
Report bugs to the project issue tracker.
