.TH SHOREWALL-NFT-RULES 5 "2026-04-24" "shorewall-nft 1.10.2" "File Formats"
.SH NAME
shorewall\-nft\-rules \- firewall rules for shorewall-nft
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I rules
file is the primary place where you allow or deny specific traffic between
zones.  Rules are checked before the default policy defined in
.IR shorewall\-nft\-policy (5).

The compiler reads this file during the IR-construction pass and emits one
or more nft rules per row into the appropriate zone-pair chain.

The
.I rules
file supports
.B ?SECTION
blocks:
.B ?SECTION NEW
(default),
.BR "?SECTION ESTABLISHED" ,
.BR "?SECTION RELATED" ,
.BR "?SECTION INVALID" ,
.BR "?SECTION UNTRACKED" .
Most operators keep all rules in the
.B NEW
section.

.SH FILE FORMAT
Location:
.I /etc/shorewall/rules
(or inside a merged
.IR /etc/shorewall46/ ).
.PP
Columns are whitespace-separated.  Lines beginning with
.B #
are comments.  Long lines may be continued with a trailing backslash.

.TS
l l l.
Column	Required	Description
_
ACTION	yes	What to do (ACCEPT, DROP, REJECT, DNAT, …)
SOURCE	yes	Source zone or address
DEST	yes	Destination zone or address
PROTO	no	Protocol number or name (tcp, udp, icmp, …)
DPORT	no	Destination port(s) or range
SPORT	no	Source port(s) or range
ORIG_DEST	no	Original destination for DNAT rules
RATE	no	Rate limit: \fIN/unit\fB:\fIburst\fR or \fBLIMIT:\fIname,rate,burst\fR
USER	no	User/group match
MARK	no	Connection mark
CONNLIMIT	no	Max concurrent connections from source: \fIcount\fR[:\fImask\fR]
TIME	no	Time range match
HEADERS	no	IPv6 extension header match (see HEADERS column)
SWITCH	no	Runtime switch name
HELPER	no	conntrack helper name
.TE

.SS ACTION syntax
.TP
.B ACCEPT
Pass the packet.
.TP
.B DROP
Silently discard.
.TP
.B REJECT
Discard and notify sender.
.TP
.B DNAT[\fI:addr\fR][\fI:port\fR]
Destination NAT.  Translates the destination to
.IR addr : port .
.TP
.B SNAT[\fI:addr\fR]
Source NAT.
.TP
.B LOG[\fI:level\fR][\fI:prefix\fR]
Log and continue.
.TP
.BI Macro / name
Built-in macro (e.g.
.BR SSH ,
.BR HTTP ,
.BR HTTPS )
or action file.
.TP
.B SYNPROXY
.RS
.B SYNPROXY[\fI(mss=N,wscale=N[,timestamp][,sack-perm])\fR]
.RE
TCP SYN-cookie engine — protect a listener against SYN-flood
without burdening the kernel SYN queue. Bare
.B SYNPROXY
emits the kernel defaults
.RB ( mss=1460 ,
.BR wscale=7 ,
.BR timestamp ,
.BR sack-perm ).
Inside the parentheses, comma-separated tokens override:
.B mss=N
and
.B wscale=N
take an integer; bare flags
.B timestamp
/
.B no-timestamp
and
.B sack-perm
/
.B no-sack-perm
toggle the corresponding flag.  Example:
.RS
.nf
SYNPROXY(mss=1380,wscale=5)  net  $FW  tcp  443
.fi
.RE
Requires nft
.B has_synproxy_stmt
(kernel ≥ 4.13);
.B \-\-strict\-features
errors at compile time on kernels that lack it.
Simlab coverage: the
.BR shorewall\-nft\-simlab (8)
.B NftOracle
flips half-open SYNs against a SYNPROXY-protected port from the
default ACCEPT expectation to DROP, so the cookie-intercept path
no longer surfaces as a false-drop in reports.
.TP
.B QUOTA[\fI(BYTES[,UNIT])\fR]
Bandwidth budget cap. Drops further packets once
.I BYTES
have crossed the matched flow.  Accepted forms:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
.B QUOTA(N)
— raw bytes
.IP \(bu 2
.B QUOTA(N,UNIT)
—
.I UNIT
is one of
.BR bytes ,
.BR kbytes ,
.BR mbytes ,
.BR gbytes
.IP \(bu 2
.B QUOTA(\fIN\fR{b|k|m|g})
— shorthand suffix:
.B QUOTA(500m)
,
.B QUOTA(1g)
.RE
Emits
.B quota over <N> <unit> drop .
Gated by
.B has_quota .
Simlab coverage:
.B QUOTA
behaviour needs sustained throughput to cross the byte threshold —
.BR shorewall\-nft\-simlab (8)
does not exercise it.  Verify via unit tests +
.B nft \-c \-f
on the target kernel.
Example:
.RS
.nf
QUOTA(500m)  net  $FW  tcp  80,443
.fi
.RE
.TP
.B CONNLIMIT[\fI(N[:mask])\fR]
Concurrent-connection cap.  Drops further connections once
.I N
existing flows match the rule's 5-tuple from the same source.  Two
forms:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
.B CONNLIMIT(N)
— per-source-IP limit; the (N+1)th concurrent connection is
dropped.
.IP \(bu 2
.B CONNLIMIT(N:mask)
—
.I mask
is an IPv4 CIDR prefix length (e.g.
.BR 24 ).
The kernel groups source addresses by prefix and applies the count
per group.
.B CONNLIMIT(50:24)
limits 50 concurrent connections per /24.
.RE
Action form mirrors the existing
.B CONNLIMIT
column (see column table above): both produce
.B ct count over <N>
and, with a mask, prepend
.BR "ip saddr and <netmask>" .
The action form additionally drops the over-limit connection; column
form lets the rule's own ACTION column decide the verdict.
Gated by
.B has_connlimit
(kernel ≥ 4.18);
.B \-\-strict\-features
errors at compile time on kernels that lack the
.B ct count
match.
Example:
.RS
.nf
CONNLIMIT(10)     net  $FW  tcp  22
CONNLIMIT(50:24)  net  $FW  tcp  443
.fi
.RE

.SS SOURCE / DEST syntax
.TP
.I zone
Zone name (matches all hosts in that zone).
.TP
.IB zone : address
Zone restricted to a specific address or CIDR prefix.
.TP
.IB zone : dnst: hostname
Zone with a DNS-driven nft set for
.I hostname
(populated by shorewalld via the tap pipeline).
Preferred form; see
.B dns:
below.
.TP
.IB zone : dns: hostname
Deprecated alias for
.BR dnst: hostname .
Both tokens produce identical IR output.  Emits a compile-time warning
— migrate to
.BR dnst: .
.TP
.IB zone : dnsr: hostname
Like
.B dnst:
but uses the active pull resolver backend in shorewalld.
.TP
.IB zone : nfset: name
Reference a named set declared in
.IR shorewall\-nft\-nfsets (5).
.TP
.IB zone :! nfset: name
Negated nfset reference — match packets whose address is
.I not
in the set.
.TP
.IB + setname
Classic Shorewall ipset reference.
The set must be declared via a load-sets directive or
.IR shorewall\-nft\-nfsets (5).
The column position determines whether
.I saddr
or
.I daddr
is matched (source column →
.BR saddr ;
dest column →
.BR daddr ).
.TP
.IB + setname [ src | dst | src,dst ]
Bracket flags override the column-position default.
.B src
forces source-address matching,
.B dst
forces destination-address matching,
.B src,dst
emits two sub-matches (both saddr and daddr must be in the set).
.TP
.IB +[ set1 , set2 , set3 ]
AND-multi-set: the packet must match
.I all
listed sets simultaneously.
Without bracket flags the column side applies to every member.
Negated form
.BI !+[ set1 , set2 ]
matches if at least one set does
.I not
contain the address.
.TP
.B $FW
Shorthand for the firewall zone.
.TP
.B all
Match any zone.
.TP
.BI ! address
Negated address.

.SS RATE column
.TP
.IB N / unit : burst
Simple token-bucket rate limit applied per rule.
.I unit
is
.BR second ,
.BR minute ,
.BR hour ,
or
.BR day .
.I burst
is the maximum burst above the steady rate.  Example:
.BR 10/minute:5 .
.TP
.BI LIMIT: name , rate , burst
Named per-source hashlimit (nft
.BR meter ).
.I name
is the meter table name; useful for sharing a limit across multiple rules.

.SS ?DYNSET directive
.PP
.B ?DYNSET set=\fIname\fB [timeout=\fIduration\fB]
.PP
A single-shot directive that attaches a dynamic-set membership
statement to the very next rule produced by the parser. Use it
to record source addresses of matched packets (typical case:
auto-blacklist on first probe). The directive resets after one
rule — a second rule that follows without a fresh
.B ?DYNSET
will
.I not
inherit the membership clause.
.PP
The
.I name
must reference a set declared via
.IR shorewall\-nft\-nfsets (5)
or a load-sets directive — the parser does
.I not
declare the set itself, only attaches the
.B add @\fIname\fR
statement.
.I duration
is an nft duration string
.RB ( 5s ,
.BR 2m ,
.BR 1h ,
.BR 1d ).
Omit the
.B timeout=
key to inherit the parent set's default.  The matched packet's
source address is added to the set on every traversal of the
attached rule, so attaching the directive to a frequently-matched
rule will populate the set quickly.
.PP
Reset a pending directive without attaching it to a rule by
issuing a bare
.B ?DYNSET
or
.BR "?DYNSET reset" .
Useful inside an
.B ?IF
block whose
.B ?DYNSET
should not leak past the block boundary.
.PP
The clause is gated by the
.B has_dynset
capability; a rule that uses
.B ?DYNSET
will fail compile under
.B \-\-strict\-features
on a kernel that lacks the dynamic-set add statement.  Example:
.RS
.nf
?DYNSET set=blacklist timeout=1h
DROP    net   $FW   tcp   22
.fi
.RE
The above pair drops SSH probes and adds the source address to
the
.B blacklist
set with a one-hour timeout, after which the entry expires unless
re-added by a subsequent probe.

.SS HEADERS column
A comma-separated list of IPv6 extension header keywords; the rule
matches packets that carry (or, when negated, lack) any of the listed
headers.  Each keyword emits one
.B exthdr
match — ``exists`` by default, ``missing`` when the column starts
with
.BR ! .
.TP
.B Accepted keywords
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
.B hop
— hop-by-hop options (nft renders this as
.BR hbh )
.IP \(bu 2
.B dst
— destination options
.IP \(bu 2
.B route
— routing header (nft renders this as
.BR rt )
.IP \(bu 2
.B frag
— fragment header
.IP \(bu 2
.B auth
— authentication header (nft renders this as
.BR ah )
.IP \(bu 2
.B esp
— encapsulating security payload
.IP \(bu 2
.B none
— no next header
.IP \(bu 2
.B protocol
— upper-layer protocol header (nft renders this as
.BR proto )
.RE
.PP
Optional prefixes
.B any:
and
.B exactly:
control match semantics in classic Shorewall and are accepted but
currently mapped to ``any`` semantics — both produce one exists/
missing match per listed header.  The match is gated by the
.B has_exthdr
capability; a rule that uses HEADERS will fail compile under
.B \-\-strict\-features
on a kernel that lacks the IPv6 ext-header match family.  Example:
.RS
.nf
ACCEPT   net   fw   -    -    -    -    -    -    -    -    !frag
.fi
.RE
The above rule accepts packets that do
.I not
carry an IPv6 fragment header (i.e. unfragmented traffic).

.SS CONNLIMIT column
.TP
.IB count [: mask ]
Limit simultaneous connections from a single source (or subnet when
.I mask
is given as an IPv4 prefix length).  Example:
.B 10
limits 10 connections per source IP;
.B 50:24
limits 50 connections per source /24.

.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Basic service access rules:
.RS
.nf
#ACTION  SOURCE  DEST    PROTO   DPORT
ACCEPT   loc     fw      tcp     22
ACCEPT   loc     net     tcp     80,443
ACCEPT   fw      net     tcp     80,443,587
.fi
.RE
.PP
DNAT for inbound web traffic to a DMZ host:
.RS
.nf
DNAT     net     dmz:198.51.100.10   tcp  80
DNAT     net     dmz:198.51.100.10   tcp  443
.fi
.RE
.PP
DNS-driven rule — allow outbound to github.com only:
.RS
.nf
ACCEPT   loc     net:dns:github.com  tcp  443
.fi
.RE
.PP
Rate-limited SSH to prevent brute-force:
.RS
.nf
ACCEPT   net     fw      tcp     22      -   -  3/min:5
.fi
.RE
.PP
Named nfset reference for a CDN allowlist:
.RS
.nf
ACCEPT   net:nfset:allowlist  loc
.fi
.RE
.PP
DNS-driven rule using the preferred
.B dnst:
prefix:
.RS
.nf
ACCEPT   loc     net:dnst:api.example.com   tcp  443
.fi
.RE
.PP
Classic ipset with bracket flag — match destination address against a
blocklist regardless of which column carries the set reference:
.RS
.nf
DROP     +blocklist[src]   fw
DROP     fw                +blocklist[dst]
.fi
.RE
.PP
AND-multi-set — packet must be in both sets simultaneously:
.RS
.nf
ACCEPT   +[trusted,vpn-users]   fw   tcp   22
.fi
.RE

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR shorewall\-nft (8),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-policy (5),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-zones (5),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-nfsets (5),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-masq (5)

.SH AUTHOR
André Valentin <avalentin@marcant.net>

.SH BUGS
Report bugs to the project issue tracker.
