.TH SHOREWALL-NFT-MIGRATE 8 "2026-04-24" "shorewall-nft 1.11.0" "System Administration"
.SH NAME
shorewall\-nft\-migrate \- verify and assist migration from Shorewall to shorewall-nft
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B shorewall\-nft\-migrate
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.I CONFIG_DIR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B shorewall\-nft\-migrate
is the standalone migration tool for operators moving from classic Shorewall
to
.BR shorewall\-nft (8).
Given a Shorewall configuration directory, it:

.IP 1. 4
Compiles the configuration through the shorewall-nft compiler and
validates the resulting nft script with
.B nft \-c
(syntax check only, no kernel load).
.IP 2. 4
Optionally runs the triangle verifier to compare the compiled nft output
against an
.BR iptables\-save (8)
baseline for semantic equivalence.
.IP 3. 4
Reports any config-language constructs that are not yet supported by
shorewall-nft (TC rules without mangle equivalent, arprules family
limitations, etc.).

This command is functionally similar to
.B shorewall\-nft migrate
but accepts a mandatory positional argument and is designed to be scripted
directly into migration checklists.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-iptables " PATH"
Path to an
.B iptables\-save
dump produced on the existing Shorewall host.  When supplied, the tool runs
the triangle verifier and reports rule-level mismatches.  Strongly recommended
for production migrations.
.TP
.BI \-o ", " \-\-output " PATH"
Write the compiled nft script to
.IR PATH .
Without this flag the script is written to a temporary file and deleted after
the check completes.
.TP
.B \-\-dry\-run
Compile the configuration and validate with
.B nft \-c \-f
(syntax check only, no kernel load).  This is the default behaviour; the flag
is accepted explicitly for script clarity.
.TP
.B \-\-help
Show usage and exit.

.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP
.I CONFIG_DIR
Path to the Shorewall configuration directory to migrate.  May be an IPv4
directory (auto-detects a v6 sibling), an IPv6-only directory, or a merged
.I shorewall46
directory.

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
All checks passed.  The configuration compiles cleanly and (if
.B \-\-iptables
was given) the nft output is semantically equivalent to the baseline.
.TP
.B 1
Compile error, nft syntax error, or verification mismatch detected.
.TP
.B 2
Argument error.

.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Dry-run migration check against the current Shorewall config:
.RS
.nf
shorewall\-nft\-migrate /etc/shorewall
.fi
.RE
.PP
Full migration check including triangle verification against the running
iptables ruleset:
.RS
.nf
iptables\-save > /tmp/baseline.txt
shorewall\-nft\-migrate \-\-iptables /tmp/baseline.txt \e
    \-o /tmp/shorewall.nft \e
    /etc/shorewall
.fi
.RE
.PP
Check a merged dual-stack config directory and save the nft script:
.RS
.nf
shorewall\-nft\-migrate \-o /tmp/merged.nft /etc/shorewall46
.fi
.RE

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR shorewall\-nft (8),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-zones (5),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-rules (5),
.BR nft (8),
.BR iptables\-save (8)

.SH AUTHOR
André Valentin <avalentin@marcant.net>

.SH BUGS
Report bugs to the project issue tracker.
For security vulnerabilities see
.IR SECURITY.md .
