.TH SHOREWALL-NFT-TUNNELS 5 "2026-04-20" "shorewall-nft 1.10.0" "File Formats"
.SH NAME
shorewall\-nft\-tunnels \- VPN and tunnel definitions for shorewall-nft
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I tunnels
file defines VPN and encapsulation tunnels.  Each entry emits the protocol-
specific rules (e.g. ESP, AH, IKE, GRE) in the appropriate chains to allow
the tunnel control and data traffic to pass through the firewall.

.SH FILE FORMAT
Location:
.I /etc/shorewall/tunnels
(or inside a merged
.IR /etc/shorewall46/ ).
.PP
Columns are whitespace-separated.  Lines beginning with
.B #
are comments.

.TS
l l l.
Column	Required	Description
_
TYPE	yes	Tunnel type keyword (see below)
ZONE	yes	Zone where the tunnel endpoint resides
GATEWAY	yes	IP address or CIDR of the tunnel gateway(s)
GATEWAY_ZONES	no	Additional zone(s) at the remote end
.TE

.SS Tunnel types
.TP
.B ipsec
Generic IPSEC (ESP/AH + IKE udp/500).
.TP
.B ipsecnat
IPSEC with NAT traversal (adds udp/4500).
.TP
.B gre
GRE tunnel (IP protocol 47).
.TP
.B ipip
IPIP tunnel (IP protocol 4).
.TP
.B 6to4
6to4 tunnel (IP protocol 41).
.TP
.B openvpn
OpenVPN (UDP/1194 by default).

.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
IPSEC tunnel to a remote gateway with NAT traversal:
.RS
.nf
#TYPE     ZONE  GATEWAY          GATEWAY_ZONES
ipsecnat  net   203.0.113.50     vpn
.fi
.RE
.PP
GRE tunnel to two remote sites:
.RS
.nf
gre       net   198.51.100.0/24
.fi
.RE
.PP
OpenVPN server:
.RS
.nf
openvpn   net   0.0.0.0/0
.fi
.RE

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR shorewall\-nft (8),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-zones (5),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-rules (5)

.SH AUTHOR
André Valentin <avalentin@marcant.net>

.SH BUGS
Report bugs to the project issue tracker.
