.TH SHOREWALL-NFT-NFSETS 5 "2026-04-24" "shorewall-nft 1.10.2" "File Formats"
.SH NAME
shorewall\-nft\-nfsets \- named dynamic nft sets for shorewall-nft
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I nfsets
file declares named dynamic nft sets that are populated at runtime by
.BR shorewalld (8).
Each row names a set and selects the backend that will keep it populated.

Declared sets can be referenced in rule files using
.IB zone : nfset: name
syntax.  The compiler emits the nft set declarations (type, flags, size);
shorewalld provides the elements.

Use
.I nfsets
instead of inline
.B dnst:hostname
syntax when you need:
.IP \(bu 2
Multiple hostnames merged into a single set.
.IP \(bu 2
Non-DNS backends (URL blocklists, cloud provider prefix lists).
.IP \(bu 2
Explicit set naming for tooling and monitoring.
.IP \(bu 2
Multiple backends feeding the same set simultaneously (additive model).

.SH FILE FORMAT
Location:
.I /etc/shorewall/nfsets
(or inside a merged
.IR /etc/shorewall46/ ).
.PP
Columns are whitespace-separated.  Lines beginning with
.B #
are comments.

.TS
l l l.
Column	Required	Description
_
NAME	yes	Logical set name; used in nfset:<name> rule syntax
HOSTS	yes	Hostname(s), URL, file path, or cloud-provider keyword
OPTIONS	yes	Backend keyword + per-backend options (comma-separated)
.TE

.PP
Multiple rows with the same
.I NAME
and the same backend are merged: their
.I HOSTS
lists are concatenated.
Multiple rows with the same
.I NAME
but different backends are stored additively \(em both backends populate the
same nft sets simultaneously (see the
.B MULTIPLE BACKENDS FOR ONE SET
section below).

.SS Brace expansion
The
.I HOSTS
column supports simple (non-nested) brace expansion:
.PP
.RS
.nf
{a,b,c}.cdn.example.com
  \(->  a.cdn.example.com  b.cdn.example.com  c.cdn.example.com
.fi
.RE

.SH BACKENDS

.SS dnstap
shorewalld intercepts DNS answers from a dnstap or PowerDNS protobuf
stream and installs the resolved A/AAAA records into the nft set with
the answer's TTL as the element timeout.

.I HOSTS
entries must be DNS hostnames (qnames).

.I Options:
.TP
.BI dnstype= a | aaaa
Restrict to one address family only.
.PP
.RS
Example:
.nf
web   {cdn,static}.example.com   dnstap
web   api.example.com            dnstap,dnstype=a
.fi
.RE

Emits:
.RS
.nf
set nfset_web_v4 { type ipv4_addr; flags timeout; size 4096; }
set nfset_web_v6 { type ipv6_addr; flags timeout; size 4096; }
.fi
.RE

.SS resolver
shorewalld actively resolves each hostname on a TTL-driven schedule and
installs the resolved IPs with the answer's TTL as an element timeout.
Use this backend when you cannot deploy dnstap (e.g. an upstream resolver
you do not control).

.I HOSTS
entries must be DNS hostnames.

.I Options:
.TP
.BI dns= IP
DNS server to query.  Can be specified multiple times for multiple servers.
.TP
.BI refresh= DURATION
Minimum re-resolve interval (e.g.
.BR 5m ,
.BR 1h ).
.TP
.BI dnstype= a | aaaa | srv
Restrict to one address family, or query SRV records.
.PP
.RS
.TP
.B dnstype=a
Resolve A records only (IPv4).
.TP
.B dnstype=aaaa
Resolve AAAA records only (IPv6).
.TP
.B dnstype=srv
Query the SRV RRset for the hostname.  For each
.I Target
in the answer, resolve its A and AAAA records and write the resulting IPs
into the nft set with TTL = min(srv_ttl, child_ttl).  The SRV port is
discarded \(em the set is IP-only.  At most 32 SRV targets are processed
per RRset.
.RE
.PP
.RS
Example (standard A/AAAA):
.nf
cdn  api.example.com www.example.com  resolver,dns=198.51.100.53,refresh=5m
.fi
.PP
Example (SRV):
.nf
sip  _sip._udp.example.org           resolver,dnstype=srv,refresh=10m
.fi
.RE

.SS ip-list
shorewalld fetches a structured prefix list from a registered cloud
provider (AWS, GCP, \&...) and installs the prefixes/CIDRs into an interval
nft set.

.I HOSTS
must be the registered provider keyword (e.g.
.BR aws ,
.BR gcp ).

.I Options:
.TP
.BI filter= dim = val
Provider-specific filter dimension, for example
.BR filter=region=us\-east\-1 .
.TP
.BI refresh= DURATION
Re-fetch interval (default: 1 h).
.PP
.RS
Example:
.nf
aws\-ec2  aws  ip\-list,filter=region=us\-east\-1,refresh=6h
.fi
.RE

Emits:
.RS
.nf
set nfset_aws_ec2_v4 { type ipv4_addr; flags interval; size 262144; }
set nfset_aws_ec2_v6 { type ipv6_addr; flags interval; size 262144; }
.fi
.RE

.SS ip-list-plain
shorewalld reads one IP or CIDR per line from an HTTP(S) URL, an absolute
file path, or a script whose stdout is the list.

.I HOSTS
must be exactly one source: a URL beginning with
.BR http:// " or " https:// ,
an absolute path (beginning with
.BR / ),
or a command prefixed with
.BR exec: .

.I Options:
.TP
.BI refresh= DURATION
Re-fetch interval (default: 1 h).
.TP
.B inotify
For file paths only: trigger an immediate reload when the file changes
(via inotify).
.PP
.RS
Examples:
.nf
# URL-backed blocklist
blocklist   https://example.org/block.txt  ip\-list\-plain

# Local file, reload on change
localblock  /var/lib/lists/blocked.txt     ip\-list\-plain,inotify

# Script-generated list, refresh every 15 minutes
dynblock    exec:/usr/local/bin/gen\-list   ip\-list\-plain,refresh=15m
.fi
.RE

.SH OPTIONS REFERENCE
.TS
l l l.
Option	Backends	Description
_
dnstap	\(em	Backend keyword
resolver	\(em	Backend keyword
ip-list	\(em	Backend keyword
ip-list-plain	\(em	Backend keyword
dns=IP	resolver	DNS server; repeatable
filter=dim=val	ip-list	Provider filter dimension
refresh=DURATION	resolver, ip-list, ip-list-plain	Re-fetch/re-resolve interval
inotify	ip-list-plain	Watch file via inotify
dnstype=a/aaaa	dnstap, resolver	Address family restriction
dnstype=srv	resolver	Query SRV; resolve each target's A+AAAA
size=N	all	nft set capacity override (k/M suffix accepted)
.TE

Duration syntax: integer seconds, or integer followed by
.BR s ,
.BR m ,
.BR h ,
or
.BR d .
Examples:
.BR 300 ,
.BR 5m ,
.BR 1h ,
.BR 2d .

Size accepts a plain integer, a
.B k
suffix (× 1024), or an
.B M
suffix (× 1048576).  Valid range: 1 \(en 67108864 (64\~M).

.SH nft SET NAMING
Each declared set produces two nft sets \(em one for IPv4 and one for IPv6:
.RS
.nf
nfset_<name>_v4
nfset_<name>_v6
.fi
.RE

Name sanitisation: the logical name is lowercased; non-alphanumeric
characters become
.BR _ ;
consecutive underscores are collapsed; the body is truncated to 22
characters with a SHA-1 collision guard appended if needed.  The maximum
total identifier length is 31 characters.

.SH nft SET FLAGS
The compiler selects
.B flags
.I per logical set name
based on the mix of backends feeding that name:

.TS
l l.
Backend mix for the name	nft flags
_
Only dnstap / resolver	flags timeout
Only ip-list / ip-list-plain	flags interval
Mix of DNS + ip-list backends	flags timeout, interval
.TE

When only one backend type feeds a set, the minimal correct flags are used.
When multiple backends feed the same set name (additive model), the union
flags are emitted.

Default
.B size
per name group:
.BR 4096 " for DNS-only names;"
.BR 262144 " when any ip-list backend is present."
Override per entry with
.BI size= N
in the OPTIONS column.

.SH MULTIPLE BACKENDS FOR ONE SET
Two or more rows with the same
.I NAME
but different backends are stored additively.
shorewalld routes each row to its own tracker; all trackers write to the
same pair of nft sets simultaneously.
.PP
Example:
.RS
.nf
# name    hosts                              options
web       cdn.example.org,edge.example.org   resolver,refresh=5m
web       /etc/shorewall46/web-extra.txt     ip-list-plain,refresh=1h
.fi
.RE
.PP
The compiler emits one
.B set nfset_web_v4
and one
.B set nfset_web_v6
with
.BR "flags timeout, interval" .
shorewalld routes the
.B resolver
row to PullResolver and the
.B ip-list-plain
row to PlainListTracker; both write IPs into the shared nft sets.

.SH REFERENCING SETS IN RULES

.TP
.IB zone : nfset: name
Match packets whose source or destination address is in the set.
.TP
.IB zone :! nfset: name
Match packets whose address is
.I not
in the set.
.TP
.IB zone : nfset: name1 , name2
Comma-separated list: expands to one rule per set (OR-clone semantics).

.PP
Classic bracket syntax is also accepted (see
.BR shorewall\-nft\-rules (5)):
.TP
.BI + setname [ src ]
Match source address against
.IR setname .
.TP
.BI + setname [ dst ]
Match destination address.
.TP
.BI + setname [ src,dst ]
Match both source and destination.
.TP
.BI +[ a,b,c ]
AND-multi-set: packet must match
.I all
listed sets simultaneously.  Distinct from the OR-clone comma expansion above.

.SS Inline dns: alternatives
Instead of declaring a named set, rules may use inline single-hostname tokens:
.TP
.IB zone : dnst: hostname
Single-hostname tap-driven set.
.B Preferred
form.
.TP
.IB zone : dnsr: hostname
Single-hostname pull-resolver-driven set.
.TP
.IB zone : dns: hostname
Alias for
.B dnst:
\(em
.BR deprecated .
Emits a compile-time WARNING once per config file.  Migrate to
.BR dnst: .

.SS Per-table token support
.TS
l l l.
Config file	SOURCE column	DEST / ADDRESS column
_
rules	yes	yes
blrules	yes	yes
stoppedrules	yes	yes
masq	yes	no (ADDRESS column not supported)
dnat	yes	no (TARGET column not supported)
tcrules	yes	yes
mangle	yes	yes
notrack	yes	yes
conntrack	yes	yes
rawnat	yes	yes
ecn	yes	yes
arprules	yes	yes
accounting	yes	yes
policies	no	no
nfacct	no	no
scfilter	no	no
.TE

.SH RELATIONSHIP TO shorewalld
The compiler (1) emits the nft set declarations in the compiled ruleset, and
(2) serialises the nfsets registry inside the
.B register-instance
control-socket payload that
.B shorewall\-nft start
sends to shorewalld.

shorewalld's NfSetsManager receives the payload and:
.IP \(bu 2
Routes
.B dnstap
/
.B resolver
entries into the DnsSetTracker pipeline.
.IP \(bu 2
Starts a PlainListTracker for
.B ip-list-plain
sources.
.IP \(bu 2
Passes
.B ip-list
configs to IpListTracker.

Multiple instances in different network namespaces can each declare a set
named
.B nfset:web
\(em shorewalld routes DNS answers into the correct nft set in the correct
netns.

.SH LARGE-SET PERFORMANCE
Very large set payloads are transferred to the target netns via zero-copy
.BR memfd_create (2)
IPC (Linux \(>= 3.17); no operator tuning is required for multi-hundred-MB
bulk ip-list loads.

When any list hits \(>= 80% of its declared capacity, a WARN log is emitted.
Set
.B SHOREWALLD_IPLIST_SWAP_RENAME=1
to enable atomic swap-rename for large refreshes (requires nft \(>= 0.9.3 and
Linux \(>= 5.10).

.SH EXAMPLES

.SS Example 1: Single-backend simple config
.nf
# /etc/shorewall46/nfsets
#NAME       HOSTS                     OPTIONS
cdn         {a,b}.cdn.example.com     dnstap
blocklist   https://example.org/bl    ip\-list\-plain,refresh=1h
.fi
.PP
Rules:
.nf
# /etc/shorewall46/rules
ACCEPT    net:nfset:cdn       loc
DROP      net:nfset:blocklist fw
.fi

.SS Example 2: SRV-enabled resolver
.nf
# /etc/shorewall46/nfsets
sip   _sip._udp.example.org   resolver,dnstype=srv,refresh=10m
.fi
.PP
Rules:
.nf
ACCEPT    net:nfset:sip   fw   udp   5060
.fi
.PP
shorewalld resolves
.I _sip._udp.example.org SRV,
extracts targets, and resolves each target's A and AAAA records (up to 32
targets per RRset).

.SS Example 3: Multi-backend for one set name
.nf
# /etc/shorewall46/nfsets
web   cdn.example.org,edge.example.org   resolver,refresh=5m
web   /etc/shorewall46/web-extra.txt     ip\-list\-plain,refresh=1h
.fi
.PP
Both rows feed
.B nfset_web_v4
and
.BR nfset_web_v6 .
The compiler emits
.B "flags timeout, interval"
(union of both backend types).

.SS Example 4: ip-list-plain with inotify
.nf
# /etc/shorewall46/nfsets
localbl   /var/lib/lists/blocked.txt   ip\-list\-plain,inotify,size=512k
.fi
.PP
shorewalld reloads the list immediately whenever the file changes, without
waiting for the default 1 h refresh cycle.  The set is declared with
.B size 524288
(512 * 1024).

.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/shorewall/nfsets
The nfsets config file.
.TP
.I /etc/shorewall46/nfsets
Dual-stack (merged) config directory variant.
.TP
.I /etc/shorewall/dnsnames.compiled
Written by
.B shorewall\-nft start
from the set declarations; read by shorewalld as its DNS allowlist.
.TP
.I /var/lib/shorewalld/
shorewalld state directory where DNS set contents are persisted across
daemon restarts.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR shorewall\-nft (8),
.BR shorewalld (8),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-rules (5),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-zones (5)

.SH AUTHOR
André Valentin <avalentin@marcant.net>

.SH BUGS
Report bugs to the project issue tracker.
