.TH SHOREWALL-NFT-POLICY 5 "2026-04-20" "shorewall-nft 1.10.0" "File Formats"
.SH NAME
shorewall\-nft\-policy \- default inter-zone traffic policies for shorewall-nft
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I policy
file defines the default action (verdict) when no explicit rule in
.I rules
matches a packet crossing a particular source/destination zone pair.

The compiler reads the policy file during IR construction and emits a default
verdict at the tail of every zone-pair chain.  Policies are evaluated after
all explicit rules have been checked.

.SH FILE FORMAT
Location:
.I /etc/shorewall/policy
(or inside a merged
.IR /etc/shorewall46/ ).
.PP
Columns are whitespace-separated.  Lines beginning with
.B #
are comments.

.TS
l l l.
Column	Required	Description
_
SOURCE	yes	Source zone or \fBall\fR
DEST	yes	Destination zone or \fBall\fR
POLICY	yes	Default action (ACCEPT/DROP/REJECT/CONTINUE/QUEUE/NFQUEUE)
LOG_LEVEL	no	Log level for the default action (info, warn, …)
BURST	no	Rate-limit burst count
CONNLIMIT	no	Connection limit per source
.TE

.SS Policy actions
.TP
.B ACCEPT
Pass the packet.
.TP
.B DROP
Silently discard the packet.
.TP
.B REJECT
Discard and send TCP RST or ICMP unreachable back to the sender.
.TP
.B CONTINUE
Fall through to the next matching policy (used with
.B all
source/dest).
.TP
.B QUEUE
Queue the packet to userspace via nfqueue.
.TP
.B NFQUEUE[\fIn\fR]
Queue to nfqueue number
.IR n .

.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Typical restrictive default policy — block all inter-zone traffic except
what the
.I rules
file explicitly allows:
.RS
.nf
#SOURCE  DEST    POLICY  LOG_LEVEL
fw       all     ACCEPT
all      fw      DROP    info
net      all     DROP    info
all      all     DROP
.fi
.RE
.PP
Allow outbound from loc, drop everything else:
.RS
.nf
fw       all     ACCEPT
loc      net     ACCEPT
loc      fw      ACCEPT
all      all     DROP    info
.fi
.RE
.PP
DMZ policy — allow DMZ outbound to internet, block DMZ to internal:
.RS
.nf
fw       all     ACCEPT
loc      net     ACCEPT
loc      dmz     ACCEPT
dmz      net     ACCEPT
all      all     DROP    info
.fi
.RE

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR shorewall\-nft (8),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-zones (5),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-rules (5)

.SH AUTHOR
André Valentin <avalentin@marcant.net>

.SH BUGS
Report bugs to the project issue tracker.
