.TH SHOREWALL-NFT-SIMLAB 8 "2026-04-24" "shorewall-nft 1.11.0" "System Administration"
.SH NAME
shorewall\-nft\-simlab \- packet-level firewall simulation lab for shorewall-nft
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B shorewall\-nft\-simlab
.RI [ GLOBAL\-OPTIONS ]
.I SUBCOMMAND
.RI [ SUBCOMMAND\-OPTIONS ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B shorewall\-nft\-simlab
(also invoked as
.BR simlab\-smoketest )
is the packet-level simulation lab for
.BR shorewall\-nft (8).
It builds three isolated Linux network namespaces (NS_SRC, NS_FW, NS_DST),
loads the compiled nft ruleset into NS_FW, and injects real Scapy packets
across TUN/TAP interfaces to verify firewall behaviour against an iptables
baseline.

The tool reports mismatches in two categories:
.TP
.B fail_drops
Packets that the iptables baseline accepted but the nft ruleset dropped.
These are potential false negatives — traffic that should be allowed is
being blocked.
.TP
.B fail_accepts
Packets that the iptables baseline dropped but the nft ruleset accepted.
These are potential false positives — traffic that should be blocked is
being allowed.

The simlab topology is derived from the
.I /etc/shorewall46
config directory (or the directory passed with
.BR \-\-config )
and from the network address dumps
.RI ( ip4add ,
.IR ip4routes ,
.IR ip6add ,
.IR ip6routes )
under
.BR \-\-data .

.SH GLOBAL OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-data " DIR"
Directory containing
.IR ip4add ,
.IR ip4routes ,
.IR ip6add ,
.I ip6routes
network-state dumps (as produced by
.B ip addr show
and
.BR "ip route show" ).
These files populate the NS_FW namespace's address and route tables so the
simlab topology mirrors the real host.
.TP
.BI \-\-config " DIR"
shorewall46 config directory (default:
.IR /etc/shorewall46 ).
.TP
.BI \-\-load\-limit " LIMIT"
Pause new work while the 1-minute load average is at or above
.I LIMIT
or while the CPU/IO PSI avg10 is ≥ 40 (default: no limit).  Useful when
running on a shared host.
.TP
.BI \-\-report\-dir " DIR"
Override the default archive directory for run reports.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-dump\-config
Disable the automatic
.B ip addr
and
.B ip route
dump from NS_FW after the ruleset is loaded.
.TP
.BI \-\-pcap\-dir " DIR"
Write one pcap file per interface to
.I DIR
during the run.  Useful for debugging probes with Wireshark.
.TP
.BI \-\-family " {4,6,both}"
Select which IP address families to probe.
.RS
.TP
.B 4
IPv4 probes only.  The
.I ip6tables.txt
dump (if present) is ignored.
.TP
.B 6
IPv6 probes only.  Requires
.I ip6tables.txt
to be present in
.BR \-\-data .
Returns an error if the file is absent.
.TP
.B both
Both IPv4 and IPv6 probes run in a single pass (default when both
dump files are present).
.RE
.IP
When
.B \-\-family
is omitted the effective family is auto-detected from the dump files
in
.BR \-\-data :
both
.I iptables.txt
and
.I ip6tables.txt
present \[->]
.BR both ;
only
.I iptables.txt
\[->]
.BR 4 ;
only
.I ip6tables.txt
\[->]
.BR 6 .

.SH SUBCOMMANDS

.SS smoke [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
Quick sanity check: one build, one representative probe per src/dst pair.
Intended to confirm the topology boots and basic forwarding works.

.RS
.TP
.B \-\-no\-auto\-sysctl
Skip automatic sysctl tuning (ip_forward, rp_filter, socket buffer sizes).
Use inside containers or when sysctls are managed externally.
.TP
.BI \-\-output\-json " PATH"
Write a machine-readable
.I simlab.json
report to
.I PATH
in the format consumed by
.B shorewall\-nft\-stagelab audit
.RB ( \-\-simlab\-report ).
.RE

.SS stress [\fIITERATIONS\fR]
Repeated build-and-destroy cycles to catch namespace teardown races and
resource leaks.
.I ITERATIONS
is the number of cycles (default: 10).

.SS limit
Push build-and-destroy cycles until the process fails, measuring the
maximum safe concurrency.  Useful for CI infrastructure sizing.

.SS full [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
Full verification: every rule covered by at least one positive and one
negative probe, plus a configurable number of random probes.  Produces
an archived run report under
.BR \-\-report\-dir .

.RS
.TP
.BI \-\-max\-per\-pair " N"
Cap probes per (src, dst) chain.  A high value (the default) means test all
rules.
.TP
.BI \-\-random " N"
Number of random probes to add on top of rule coverage.
.TP
.BI \-\-seed " N"
Seed for the random probe generator (default: wall clock time, producing a
non-reproducible run).
.TP
.BI \-\-random\-per\-rule " N"
Number of random variants sampled per rule within that rule's own
src/dst/port constraints (default: 64).
.TP
.BI \-\-batch\-size " N"
Maximum probes in flight per batch (default: 512).  Higher values increase
throughput at the cost of transient memory for the ProbeSpec batch.
.TP
.BI \-\-probe\-timeout " SECS"
Per-probe timeout in seconds (default: 0.25).  IPv6 forwarding needs NDP
neighbour resolution, which adds 100-150 ms on top of the base TUN/TAP
round-trip.  Raise to 0.5 or 1.0 if false
.I fail_drops
persist.  Lower to 0.15 for IPv4-only configs.
.TP
.B \-v
Dump raw sysctl values before the run.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-auto\-sysctl
Skip automatic sysctl tuning.
.TP
.B \-\-keep\-namespace
Preserve the simulator namespace after the run for interactive debugging.
The operator must clean it up manually:
.RS
.nf
sudo ip netns delete <name>
.fi
.RE
.TP
.BI \-\-sleep\-before\-shutdown " SECONDS"
Sleep N seconds before shutting down the namespace.  Gives the operator
time to attach debuggers or capture traffic without a TTY.
.RE

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B SIMLAB_REPORT_DIR
Override the default archive directory for run reports (equivalent to
.BR \-\-report-dir ).

.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/shorewall46/
Default shorewall-nft config directory.
.TP
.I simlab.json
Machine-readable result file written by
.B full \-\-output\-json
and consumed by
.B shorewall\-nft\-stagelab audit \-\-simlab\-report .

.SH NOTES
The simlab topology models a single firewall host with two external interfaces.
It does
.B not
model a second HA peer.  VRRP exchange (IP protocol 112, multicast 224.0.0.18)
and conntrackd sync traffic (UDP/3780) cannot be validated by simlab.  Use
.B shorewall\-nft verify \-\-iptables
for rule-level coverage of those paths, and a manual failover drill for
behavioural validation.

The simlab requires root privileges to create network namespaces and TUN/TAP
interfaces.

.SS Feature coverage
simlab has two complementary oracles.  The primary
.B RulesetOracle
parses the
.B iptables\-save
dump (point-of-truth) and answers per-tuple verdict queries — it covers
everything iptables can express.  The complementary
.B NftOracle
parses the compiled nft script directly and patches expected verdicts for
nft-only features the iptables oracle cannot see.
.PP
The current coverage matrix (probe classes A through I, with documented
skip rationale) lives in the libnftnl-integration phase 6 audit at
.B tmp/simlab-audit/AUDIT.md
in the source tree.  Behavioural probe coverage exists for verdicts,
zone-pair dispatch, NDP/ICMPv6, conntrack-state, family-split policies,
IPsec, flowtable, and SYNPROXY (cookie intercept).  Features deferred to
unit tests +
.B nft \-c \-f
validation:
.TP
.B QUOTA
Behaviour requires sustained throughput to cross the configured byte
threshold; the per-batch probe model can't meaningfully exercise it.
.TP
.B OSF
Stateful fingerprint database; no behavioural delta in random probes
without curated TCP/IP stacks.
.TP
.B EXTHDR (cumulative)
scapy can craft IPv6 extension headers but the 3-netns topology measures
no behavioural diff beyond match/no-match.
.TP
.B DUP
Out-of-band sink (IDS, syslog, netflow) — no observable behaviour from
inside the netns.  Defer to stagelab if external-collector validation
is needed.
.TP
.B FWD
.B fwd
is a netdev-ingress-only statement.  Outside the scope of inet-table
mangle-prerouting where the rest of the simlab probes operate.
.TP
.B LOG / NFLOG
Logging produces no packet-level effect; observable only via syslog or
nfnetlink listeners (out-of-band).
.TP
.B TPROXY / REDIRECT
Need an in-NS listener primitive simlab does not yet have; deferred
until a probe-class for transparent-proxy redirection lands (probe class
J in the phase 6 plan).

.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Quick smoke test against the current config using real network state:
.RS
.nf
shorewall\-nft\-simlab \-\-data /etc/shorewall46/netstate \e
    \-\-config /etc/shorewall46 \e
    smoke
.fi
.RE
.PP
Full verification run with 1000 random probes, saving a machine-readable
report:
.RS
.nf
shorewall\-nft\-simlab \-\-config /etc/shorewall46 \e
    full \e
    \-\-random 1000 \e
    \-\-seed 42 \e
    \-\-output\-json /tmp/simlab.json
.fi
.RE
.PP
Stress test with 50 build-destroy cycles:
.RS
.nf
shorewall\-nft\-simlab stress 50
.fi
.RE

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR shorewall\-nft (8),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-stagelab (8),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-zones (5),
.BR nft (8),
.BR ip\-netns (8)

.SH AUTHOR
André Valentin <avalentin@marcant.net>

.SH BUGS
Report bugs to the project issue tracker.
For security vulnerabilities see
.IR SECURITY.md .
