.TH SHOREWALL-NFT-STAGELAB 8 "2026-04-24" "shorewall-nft 1.11.0" "System Administration"
.SH NAME
shorewall\-nft\-stagelab \- distributed bridge-lab for performance and readiness testing of shorewall-nft
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B shorewall\-nft\-stagelab
.I SUBCOMMAND
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.RI [ ARGS ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B shorewall\-nft\-stagelab
is the performance and operational-readiness validation tool for
.BR shorewall\-nft (8).
It connects to a distributed lab topology over SSH, executes a battery of
scenarios (kernel-stack throughput via iperf3, DPDK line-rate with TRex,
connection-rate stress, SNMP metric verification, VRRP failover), collects
Prometheus metrics and rule-advisor hints, and produces a structured report.

The stagelab operates in a network bridge topology rather than the three-netns
topology of
.BR shorewall\-nft\-simlab (8).
Both tools share the
.I shorewall-nft-netkit
package for TUN/TAP and netns primitives.

.SH SUBCOMMANDS

.SS run \fICONFIG_PATH\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
Connect to the lab agents, execute all configured scenarios in order, and
write a structured report to an output directory.

.RS
.TP
.BI \-\-output\-dir " DIRECTORY"
Override
.I report.output_dir
from the configuration file.  When given the report is written here;
otherwise the config value is used.
.RE

.I CONFIG_PATH
is a YAML or JSON stagelab configuration file validated by Pydantic.  It
declares the lab topology (hosts, interfaces, scenario parameters) and
report settings.

.SS audit \fIREPORT_DIRS\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
Consolidate one or more stagelab run-directories into a signed-off audit
report (single-file HTML and optionally PDF).

.RS
.TP
.BI \-\-output " DIRECTORY"
Write
.I audit.html
(and
.I audit.pdf
when PDF is selected) here.  Default: first
.IR REPORT_DIR .
.TP
.BI \-\-format " FORMAT"
Output format:
.B html
,
.B pdf
, or
.B both
(default: both; PDF requires
.BR weasyprint ).
.TP
.BI \-\-operator " NAME"
Operator name printed on the audit cover page (default:
.BR $USER ).
.TP
.BI \-\-simlab\-report " FILE"
Path to a
.I simlab.json
produced by
.B shorewall\-nft\-simlab full \-\-output\-json .
When given the packet-level simulation results are merged into the audit.
.RE

.SS inspect \fIREPORT_DIR\fR
Print the
.I summary.md
from
.I REPORT_DIR
to stdout.  Useful for a quick text overview without opening the full HTML
report.

.SS review \fIREPORT_DIR\fR [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
Consolidate tier-B rule-order recommendations and optimization hints into a
human-readable review bundle.  Optionally open a pull request against a
firewall-config repository.

.RS
.TP
.BI \-\-output " DIRECTORY"
Write the review artifacts here (default:
.IR REPORT_DIR ).
.TP
.B \-\-open\-pr
Open a pull request on the remote firewall-config repository.  Requires
.B gh
(GitHub CLI) to be authenticated.
.TP
.BI \-\-repo " OWNER/NAME"
GitHub repository in
.I owner/name
format.  Required when
.B \-\-open\-pr
is set.
.TP
.BI \-\-branch " NAME"
Branch name for the pull request (default:
.BI stagelab/ run_id ).
.RE

.SS validate \fICONFIG_PATH\fR
Load and Pydantic-validate the stagelab configuration file.  Exits 0 on
success, 1 on validation error with a structured error message.  Useful for
CI pre-flight checks before scheduling a
.B run .

.SH CONFIGURATION FILE FORMAT
The stagelab configuration file is YAML (recommended) or JSON.  It is
validated by Pydantic at load time.  Key top-level sections:

.TP
.B lab:
Lab topology: hostnames, SSH connection parameters, interface names.
.TP
.B scenarios:
List of scenario definitions.  Each entry declares a scenario name,
parameters (packet sizes, rates, duration), and pass/fail thresholds.
.TP
.B report:
.I output_dir
and report metadata (title, operator, retention).
.TP
.B advisor:
Rule-order advisor configuration (tier thresholds, maximum hints).

Use
.B shorewall\-nft\-stagelab validate
to check a draft configuration before running.

.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Validate a stagelab configuration before scheduling a run:
.RS
.nf
shorewall\-nft\-stagelab validate /etc/stagelab/prod\-fw.yaml
.fi
.RE
.PP
Run a full lab session and write the report:
.RS
.nf
shorewall\-nft\-stagelab run /etc/stagelab/prod\-fw.yaml \e
    \-\-output\-dir /var/lib/stagelab/runs/2026\-04\-20
.fi
.RE
.PP
Inspect the latest run report in the terminal:
.RS
.nf
shorewall\-nft\-stagelab inspect /var/lib/stagelab/runs/2026\-04\-20
.fi
.RE
.PP
Generate a signed-off audit report from two run directories, merging
simlab packet-level results:
.RS
.nf
shorewall\-nft\-stagelab audit \e
    /var/lib/stagelab/runs/2026\-04\-20 \e
    /var/lib/stagelab/runs/2026\-04\-19 \e
    \-\-simlab\-report /tmp/simlab.json \e
    \-\-operator "A. Valentin" \e
    \-\-output /var/lib/stagelab/audit\-2026\-04
.fi
.RE
.PP
Collect rule-order review artifacts and open a GitHub PR:
.RS
.nf
shorewall\-nft\-stagelab review \e
    /var/lib/stagelab/runs/2026\-04\-20 \e
    \-\-open\-pr \-\-repo myorg/fw\-config
.fi
.RE

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR shorewall\-nft (8),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-simlab (8),
.BR shorewalld (8),
.BR nft (8)

Full stagelab documentation:
.I docs/testing/stagelab.md
in the project repository.

.SH AUTHOR
André Valentin <avalentin@marcant.net>

.SH BUGS
Report bugs to the project issue tracker.
For security vulnerabilities see
.IR SECURITY.md .
