.TH SHOREWALL-NFT-NAT 5 "2026-04-24" "shorewall-nft 1.11.0" "File Formats"
.SH NAME
shorewall\-nft\-nat \- classic 1:1 static NAT for shorewall-nft
.SH SYNOPSIS
.I /etc/shorewall/nat
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I nat
file defines one-to-one static NAT mappings.  Each row emits a paired
PREROUTING DNAT rule (translating the external address to the internal
one) and a POSTROUTING SNAT rule (translating the internal address back
to the external one on the way out).
.PP
For more complex SNAT (round-robin, probabilistic, masquerade) see
.BR shorewall\-nft\-snat (5)
or
.BR shorewall\-nft\-masq (5).
For port-selective DNAT inside the
.I rules
file see
.BR shorewall\-nft\-rules (5).
.SH COLUMNS
Location:
.I /etc/shorewall/nat
(or inside a merged
.IR /etc/shorewall46/ ).
.PP
Columns are whitespace-separated.  Lines beginning with
.B #
are comments.

.TS
l l l.
Column	Required	Description
_
EXTERNAL	yes	External (public) IP address
INTERFACE	yes	Interface carrying the external address
INTERNAL	yes	Internal (private) IP to map to/from
ALL	no	Yes|No — also NAT traffic from all zones (default: No)
LOCAL	no	Yes|No — add an OUTPUT DNAT for firewall-originated traffic (default: No)
.TE

.TP
.B ALL=Yes
Emits SNAT rules covering traffic between any two zones, not just
external\(->internal.  Use when the internal host must appear with the
external address regardless of path.
.TP
.B LOCAL=Yes
Adds an OUTPUT chain DNAT rule so that packets originating on the
firewall itself are also translated when reaching
.IR EXTERNAL .

.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
1:1 mapping for a DMZ server:
.RS
.nf
#EXTERNAL       INTERFACE  INTERNAL       ALL  LOCAL
203.0.113.100   eth0       192.168.100.10
.fi
.RE
.PP
Full 1:1 with outbound and local access:
.RS
.nf
203.0.113.101   eth0       192.168.100.11  Yes  Yes
.fi
.RE

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR shorewall\-nft (8),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-snat (5),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-masq (5),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-rules (5)

.SH AUTHOR
André Valentin <avalentin@marcant.net>

.SH BUGS
Report bugs to the project issue tracker.
