.TH SHOREWALL-NFT-SYNPARAMS 5 "2026-04-20" "shorewall-nft 1.10.0" "File Formats"
.SH NAME
shorewall\-nft\-synparams \- per-zone SYN-flood rate limits for shorewall-nft
.SH SYNOPSIS
.I /etc/shorewall/synparams
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I synparams
file sets per-zone SYN-flood protection parameters.  For each zone listed
the compiler emits a dedicated chain
.BI synflood- zone
and inserts a TCP-SYN rate-limit jump at the head of every zone-pair chain
whose source is that zone.
.PP
Packets that exceed the rate limit are dropped; packets within the limit
pass to the normal rule evaluation.
.SH COLUMNS
Location:
.I /etc/shorewall/synparams
(or inside a merged
.IR /etc/shorewall46/ ).
.PP
Columns are whitespace-separated.  Lines beginning with
.B #
are comments.

.TS
l l l.
Column	Required	Description
_
ZONE	yes	Source zone to protect against
RATE	yes	Accepted SYN rate (e.g. 100/second, 25/minute)
BURST	yes	Burst allowance above the steady rate
SUPPRESS	no	Yes|No — suppress logging of excess SYNs (default: No)
.TE

.TP
.B RATE
Token-bucket fill rate.  Format:
.IB N / unit
where
.I unit
is
.BR second ,
.BR minute ,
.BR hour ,
or
.BR day .
.TP
.B BURST
Maximum burst.  Must be \(>= 1.  Typical value: 5\(en20.
.TP
.B SUPPRESS=Yes
Emit the rate-limit rule without a LOG prefix for dropped SYNs.

.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Protect the firewall from SYN floods from the internet:
.RS
.nf
#ZONE  RATE          BURST
net    200/second    25
.fi
.RE
.PP
Stricter limit for an untrusted zone, with excess suppressed:
.RS
.nf
dmz    50/second     10    Yes
.fi
.RE

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR shorewall\-nft (8),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-zones (5),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-rules (5),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-policy (5)

.SH AUTHOR
André Valentin <avalentin@marcant.net>

.SH BUGS
Report bugs to the project issue tracker.
