.TH SHOREWALL-NFT-SECMARKS 5 "2026-04-25" "shorewall-nft 1.11.0" "File Formats"
.SH NAME
shorewall\-nft\-secmarks \- SELinux security mark labelling
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I secmarks
file declares packet labelling rules for SELinux Mandatory Access
Control policies.  Each row associates a 5-tuple match with a
SELinux security context; matching packets are tagged with
.B meta secmark set "<name>"
and the chain falls through to subsequent rules.
.PP
shorewall-nft compiles each unique SELinux label into one
.B secmark <name> { "<label>" }
named-object declaration at the top of the inet shorewall table.
Names are assigned deterministically as
.BR _sm_0 ,
.BR _sm_1 ,
… in the order each label first appears in the file, so two rows
sharing a label reuse a single named object — one allocation per
context.
.PP
The compiled emit is gated by the
.B has_secmark_obj
capability; on kernels that lack the named-object form
.B \-\-strict\-features
errors at compile time.  At nft-load time the kernel further
resolves each label against the loaded SELinux policy — without
SELinux loaded the rules pass nft syntactically but the kernel
silently no-ops the secmark assignment.

.SH FILE FORMAT
Location:
.I /etc/shorewall/secmarks
(or inside a merged
.IR /etc/shorewall46/ ).

Whitespace-separated columns; lines beginning with
.B #
are comments.

.TS
l l l.
Column	Required	Description
_
SECMARK	yes	SELinux security context string (quoted or bare)
CHAIN	yes	One of P / I / O / F / T (see CHAIN codes)
SOURCE	no	Source zone:address or CIDR
DEST	no	Destination zone:address or CIDR
PROTO	no	Protocol filter (tcp, udp, …)
DPORT	no	Destination port filter
SPORT	no	Source port filter
STATE	no	Connection-state filter (new, established, …)
.TE

.SS CHAIN codes
.TP
.B P
PREROUTING — tag inbound packets before routing decision (most common).
.TP
.B I
INPUT — tag packets destined for the firewall itself.
.TP
.B O
OUTPUT — tag packets originating on the firewall.
.TP
.B F
FORWARD — tag packets passing through the firewall between zones.
.TP
.B T
POSTROUTING — tag packets after routing, just before egress.

Each code maps to a mangle-table chain at priority -150.  Unknown
CHAIN codes cause the row to be skipped with a compile-time warning;
the rest of the file still compiles.

.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Tag inbound HTTP / HTTPS as
.B web_t
and inbound SSH as
.B ssh_t
(two rows share the web_t label and collapse to one named object):
.RS
.nf
#SECMARK                            CHAIN  SOURCE  DEST  PROTO  DPORT
"system_u:object_r:web_t:s0"        P      net     fw    tcp    80
"system_u:object_r:web_t:s0"        P      net     fw    tcp    443
"system_u:object_r:ssh_t:s0"        P      net     fw    tcp    22
.fi
.RE

Compiled emit (excerpt):
.RS
.nf
\fB\fItable inet shorewall {\fR
    secmark _sm_0 { "system_u:object_r:web_t:s0" }
    secmark _sm_1 { "system_u:object_r:ssh_t:s0" }
    chain mangle-prerouting {
        type filter hook prerouting priority -150;
        ip saddr <net> ip daddr <fw> tcp dport 80   meta secmark set "_sm_0"
        ip saddr <net> ip daddr <fw> tcp dport 443  meta secmark set "_sm_0"
        ip saddr <net> ip daddr <fw> tcp dport 22   meta secmark set "_sm_1"
    }
}
.fi
.RE

.SH LIMITATIONS
.PP
The following classic-Shorewall semantics are NOT yet supported.
A row that uses any of them is skipped at compile time with a
warning; the rest of the file still compiles.

.TP
.B SAVE / RESTORE column values
Classic Shorewall's CONNSECMARK semantics — save the packet
secmark to the conntrack entry on the first packet, restore it
to subsequent packets — are not yet wired.  The nft equivalents
(\fBct secmark set meta secmark\fR / \fBmeta secmark set ct secmark\fR)
will be added in a follow-up commit when an operator surfaces the
need.  For now, fresh per-flow labelling on every packet via
SECMARK works correctly; what's missing is propagating the label
across packets of the same flow.

.TP
.B ct secmark matching in regular rules
Filter-chain rules cannot match against the conntrack secmark
(\fBct secmark == "<label>"\fR) yet.  Same reason as SAVE/RESTORE
— deferred pending CONNSECMARK companion work.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR shorewall\-nft (8),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-rules (5),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-mangle (5)

.SH AUTHOR
André Valentin <avalentin@marcant.net>

.SH BUGS
Report bugs to the project issue tracker.
