.TH SHOREWALLD 8 "2026-04-24" "shorewall-nft 1.11.0" "System Administration"
.SH NAME
shorewalld \- Prometheus exporter and DNS-driven nft-set daemon for shorewall-nft
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B shorewalld
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.PP
.B shorewalld tap
.BI \-\-socket " PATH"
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B shorewalld
is the companion daemon for
.BR shorewall\-nft (8).
It provides three independent services:

.TP
.B Prometheus exporter
Scrapes per-rule packet and byte counters, per-interface traffic statistics,
flowtable offload rates, conntrack fill level, socket statistics, and
neighbour table state from every
.I inet shorewall
table on the host, across all configured network namespaces.  A single
libnftables round-trip per scrape cycle keeps overhead low.  Metrics are
exposed at a plain-text Prometheus endpoint (default
.BR :9748 ).

.TP
.B DNS-set pipeline
Accepts a dnstap FrameStream from
.BR pdns-recursor (1)
via a Unix socket or TCP, or a PBDNSMessage protobuf stream via TCP, and
populates nft sets named
.I dns_<qname>_v4
/
.I dns_<qname>_v6
with the resolved A/AAAA records, using the answer's TTL as the nft element
expiry.  This lets
.B shorewall\-nft
rules match hostnames rather than literal IP addresses:
.RS
.nf
ACCEPT  fw  net:dns:github.com  tcp  443
.fi
.RE
The compiler declares the nft sets; shorewalld keeps them populated.

.TP
.B NFLOG log dispatcher
Subscribes to an
.B nfnetlink_log
group inside every managed netns and surfaces matches as a
labelled Prometheus counter plus optional sinks (plain file, unix
socket, systemd-journald, /dev/log).  Activated by
.B LOG_DISPATCH=shorewalld
together with
.BI LOG_NFLOG_GROUP= N
(must match the
.I N
in
.BI \[dq]nft log group "  " N \[dq]
/ the shorewall\-nft
.BI LOG_BACKEND=netlink, N
directive).  Every sink is drop-on-full; a slow downstream consumer
never stalls the firewall event path.  Replaces the per-netns
.BR ulogd2 (8)
plumbing for operators already running shorewalld per netns.

Running
.B shorewalld
without
.B \-\-instance
or
.B \-\-listen\-api
starts the Prometheus exporter only.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-config\-file " PATH"
Read configuration from
.I PATH
(default: first of
.I /etc/shorewalld.conf
then
.IR /etc/shorewall/shorewalld.conf ;
a missing file is silently ignored).  CLI flags always override file values.
.TP
.BI \-\-listen\-prom " HOST:PORT"
Prometheus scrape endpoint (default:
.BR :9748 ).
.TP
.BI \-\-listen\-api " PATH"
Unix socket path for the dnstap FrameStream consumer.  Off by default.
Setting this enables the DNS-set pipeline.
.TP
.BI \-\-netns " SPEC"
Namespace selection.  Empty string = daemon's own network namespace only.
.B auto
= walk
.I /run/netns/
and discover all namespaces that carry an
.I inet shorewall
table.  A comma-separated list such as
.B fw,rns1,rns2
targets explicit namespaces.
.TP
.BI \-\-scrape\-interval " SECS"
Minimum age (seconds) for cached counters before a fresh scrape is performed
(default: 30).
.TP
.BI \-\-reprobe\-interval " SECS"
How often (seconds) to re-check which namespaces have acquired or lost an
.I inet shorewall
table (default: 300).
.TP
.BI \-\-log\-level " LEVEL"
Log level:
.BR debug ,
.BR info ,
.BR warning ,
.BR error ,
.BR critical
(default:
.BR info ).
.TP
.BI \-\-log\-target " TARGET"
Log destination:
.BR stderr ,
.BR stdout ,
.BR syslog ,
.BR journal ,
.BI file: PATH
(default:
.BR stderr ).
.TP
.BI \-\-log\-format " FORMAT"
Log format:
.B human
(default),
.B structured
(key=value),
.B json
(one JSON object per line).
.TP
.BI \-\-log\-syslog\-socket " PATH"
AF_UNIX syslog socket path (default:
.IR /dev/log ).
.TP
.BI \-\-log\-syslog\-facility " FACILITY"
Syslog facility (default:
.BR daemon ).
.TP
.BI \-\-log\-rate\-limit\-window " SECS"
Dedup window in seconds for rate-limited hot-path warnings (default: 60).
.TP
.BI \-\-allowlist\-file " PATH"
Compiled DNS allowlist file (produced by
.BR "shorewall\-nft compile" ).
Deprecated alias for
.B \-\-instance
with a file argument.  Use
.B \-\-instance
instead.
.TP
.BI \-\-listen\-pbdns " PATH"
Unix socket path for the PBDNSMessage logger stream from
.B pdns-recursor
(off by default).
.TP
.BI \-\-listen\-pbdns\-tcp " HOST:PORT"
TCP host:port for the PBDNSMessage logger stream.  Required for
.BR pdns-recursor 's
.B protobufServer()
Lua directive which speaks TCP only.  Can run alongside
.BR \-\-listen\-pbdns .
.TP
.BI \-\-socket\-mode " MODE"
Octal permission mode for daemon-owned Unix sockets (default: 0660).  Use
0660 with
.B \-\-socket\-group pdns
so the recursor can connect without running as root.
.TP
.BI \-\-socket\-owner " USER"
User name or numeric UID to
.BR chown (2)
the Unix sockets to after binding (default: leave as current process owner).
.TP
.BI \-\-socket\-group " GROUP"
Group name or numeric GID to
.BR chgrp (2)
the Unix sockets to after binding (default: leave unchanged).
.TP
.BI \-\-peer\-host " HOST"
HA peer IP address or hostname for DNS-set replication (off by default).
.TP
.BI \-\-peer\-port " PORT"
HA peer UDP port (default: 9749).
.TP
.BI \-\-peer\-bind " HOST:PORT"
HA peer local bind address and port (default: 0.0.0.0:9749).
.TP
.BI \-\-peer\-auth\-key\-file " PATH"
Pre-shared HMAC-SHA256 secret file for the HA peer link.  Required when
.B \-\-peer\-host
is set.  File must be mode ≤ 0600 and contain at least 16 bytes.
.TP
.BI \-\-peer\-heartbeat\-interval " SECS"
HA peer heartbeat interval in seconds (default: 5).
.TP
.BI \-\-state\-dir " PATH"
Directory for DNS-set state persistence (default:
.IR /var/lib/shorewalld ).
The daemon writes set contents here so they survive daemon restarts without
waiting for the recursor to re-answer every name.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-state
Disable DNS-set state persistence entirely.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-state\-load
Skip loading saved state on start; still save periodically.
.TP
.B \-\-state\-flush
Delete the saved state file on start (force a clean boot).
.TP
.BI \-\-instance " [NETNS:]DIR"
Register a shorewall-nft config directory as a managed instance.  Format:
.BI [ netns: ] dir .
Omitting the netns prefix means the root network namespace.  Repeat for
multiple instances.  This flag activates the DNS-set pipeline; the daemon
reads the compiled allowlist from
.IB DIR /dnsnames.compiled
and routes DNS answers into the correct nft sets in the correct netns.
.TP
.BI \-\-control\-socket " PATH"
Unix socket path for the control API (refresh-iplist, reload-instance,
status queries from
.BR "shorewall\-nft start" ).
Off by default.
.TP
.BI \-\-control\-socket\-netns " NETNS"
Bind the control socket inside this named network namespace.
.TP
.B \-\-enable\-vrrp\-collector
Enable the VRRP D-Bus collector that scrapes keepalived state from the
system bus (
.IB org.keepalived. *
by default).
Requires
.B jeepney>=0.8
(installed via
.BR "pip install shorewalld[vrrp]" );
degrades silently if jeepney is absent or keepalived is not running.
On AlmaLinux 10 / RHEL 10, keepalived is built without
.BR \-\-enable\-dbus ;
the collector will report
.B dbus_unavailable
errors and emit no VRRP metrics on those hosts.
Use
.B \-\-vrrp\-snmp\-enable
to obtain metrics on AL10.
See the PROMETHEUS METRICS section below for the metric list.
.TP
.B \-\-vrrp\-snmp\-enable
Enable SNMP augmentation of the VRRP collector via the KEEPALIVED-MIB
sub-agent.  When active, the collector additionally queries keepalived's
SNMP agent to fill in the fields that the D-Bus interface leaves at zero:
.BR priority ,
.BR effective_priority ,
.BR vip_count ,
and
.BR master_transitions .
On AlmaLinux 10 / RHEL 10 where keepalived ships without
.BR \-\-enable\-dbus ,
this flag enables
.I SNMP-only
discovery mode — all instances are discovered from the SNMP table and
.B bus_name
is reported as
.BR "" .
Requires
.B pysnmp>=7.0
(installed via
.BR "pip install shorewalld[snmp]" );
degrades silently if pysnmp is absent.
keepalived must be built with
.B \-\-enable\-snmp\-vrrp
and
.B snmpd
must have the pass-through sub-agent configured.
.TP
.BI \-\-vrrp\-snmp\-host " HOST"
SNMP agent host for VRRP augmentation (default:
.BR 127.0.0.1 ).
.TP
.BI \-\-vrrp\-snmp\-port " PORT"
SNMP agent UDP port for VRRP augmentation (default:
.BR 161 ).
.TP
.BI \-\-vrrp\-snmp\-community " STR"
SNMPv2c community string for VRRP augmentation (default:
.BR public ).
.TP
.BI \-\-vrrp\-snmp\-timeout " SECS"
SNMP request timeout in seconds (default:
.BR 1.0 ).
.TP
.BI \-\-dns\-dedup\-refresh\-threshold " FLOAT"
Fraction of the proposed TTL that must remain in the existing nft element
expiry before a DNS answer is treated as a duplicate and the write is skipped.
Range: 0.0\(en1.0; default:
.BR 0.5
(50 %).  Lower values write more frequently; higher values write less often
but may serve slightly stale addresses for longer.  Also configurable via
.B DNS_DEDUP_REFRESH_THRESHOLD
in
.IR shorewalld.conf .
.TP
.BI \-\-batch\-window\-seconds " SECS"
Coalescing window in seconds for the SetWriter batch pipeline.  DNS updates
arriving within this window are merged into a single nft transaction.
Default:
.B 0.010
(10 ms).  Increase to reduce nft round-trips under heavy load; decrease for
lower latency on sparse traffic.  Also configurable via
.B BATCH_WINDOW_SECONDS
in
.IR shorewalld.conf .
.TP
.BI \-\-log\-dispatch " MODE"
NFLOG log-dispatcher activation.  One of
.BR shorewalld ,
.BR ulogd2 ,
.B none
(default).
.B shorewalld
turns on the per-netns
.B nfnetlink_log
subscription (requires
.BR CAP_NET_ADMIN );
.B ulogd2
signals operator intent ("my own ulogd2 unit handles this") and
behaves like
.B none
for shorewalld itself.
Requires
.B \-\-log\-nflog\-group
to be set.
.TP
.BI \-\-log\-nflog\-group " N"
nfnetlink_log group number to subscribe to when
.BR \-\-log\-dispatch = shorewalld .
Must match the
.I N
in the nft
.BI "log group " N
directive (or shorewall-nft
.BI LOG_BACKEND=netlink, N ).
.TP
.BI \-\-log\-dispatch\-file " PATH"
Optional plain-text append-only sink.  Format:
.IR "<ts> netns=<X> chain=<Y> disposition=<Z> [rule=<N>]" .
Opened with
.B O_NONBLOCK
so a slow disk drops events rather than stalling the hot path.
.TP
.BI \-\-log\-dispatch\-socket " PATH"
Optional unix-socket fan-out sink.  Any client connected over
AF_UNIX/SOCK_STREAM receives newline-JSON events
(schema_version=1: ts, netns, chain, disposition, rule_num).
Multi-subscriber; slow clients are disconnected, not throttled.
.TP
.B \-\-log\-dispatch\-journald
Forward events to
.BR systemd-journald (8)
via
.IR /run/systemd/journal/socket
with structured fields
.RB ( SHOREWALL_CHAIN ,
.BR SHOREWALL_DISPOSITION ,
.BR SHOREWALL_NETNS ,
.BR SHOREWALL_RULE_NUM ).
Priority maps from disposition (DROP/REJECT = 4, ACCEPT = 6,
else = 5).
.TP
.BI \-\-log\-dispatch\-syslog " PATH"
Forward events to a syslog daemon as RFC 3164 datagrams (typical:
.IR /dev/log ).
LOCAL0 facility; severity maps as for journald.
.TP
.BI \-\-keepalived\-snmp\-unix " PATH"
Path to snmpd's Unix DGRAM socket (e.g.
.IR /run/snmpd/snmpd.sock ).
When set, activates the MIB-driven keepalived walker: shorewalld
performs a full KEEPALIVED-MIB walk every
.B \-\-keepalived\-walk\-interval
seconds and auto-registers one Prometheus family per MIB column.
Requires the distro package
.B python3-netsnmp
.RB ( "apt install python3-netsnmp" )
or
.B net-snmp-python3
.RB ( "dnf install net-snmp-python3" ).
Degrades silently when the library is absent.
Also configurable via
.B KEEPALIVED_SNMP_UNIX
in
.IR shorewalld.conf .
.TP
.BI \-\-keepalived\-trap\-socket " PATH"
Path for the Unix DGRAM socket that receives SNMPv2c traps forwarded
by snmpd (configure with
.B "trap2sink unix:<path>"
in
.IR snmpd.conf ).
Only active when
.B \-\-keepalived\-snmp\-unix
is also set.
Requires
.B pysnmp>=7.0
.RB ( "pip install shorewalld[snmp]" ).
Also configurable via
.B KEEPALIVED_TRAP_SOCKET
in
.IR shorewalld.conf .
.TP
.B \-\-keepalived\-wide\-tables
Enable high-cardinality keepalived MIB tables:
.BR vrrpRouteTable ,
.BR virtualServerTable ,
.BR vrrpRuleTable .
Off by default to cap Prometheus cardinality.
Also configurable via
.B KEEPALIVED_WIDE_TABLES=yes
in
.IR shorewalld.conf .
.TP
.B \-\-no\-keepalived\-wide\-tables
Disable wide-table families (default).
.TP
.B \-\-keepalived\-scrape\-virtual\-servers
Include LVS
.B virtualServerTable
metrics.  Default on.
Also configurable via
.B KEEPALIVED_SCRAPE_VIRTUAL_SERVERS
in
.IR shorewalld.conf .
.TP
.B \-\-no\-keepalived\-scrape\-virtual\-servers
Exclude LVS virtual-server metrics.
.TP
.BI \-\-keepalived\-dbus\-methods " TIER"
D-Bus method ACL tier.  One of
.BR none ,
.B readonly
(default: only
.B print_data
and
.B print_stats
permitted), or
.B all
(also allows
.B reload_config
and
.BR send_garp ).
Also configurable via
.B KEEPALIVED_DBUS_METHODS
in
.IR shorewalld.conf .
.TP
.B \-\-keepalived\-dbus\-create\-instance
Enable
.B CreateInstance
/
.B DestroyInstance
D-Bus methods.  Requires keepalived built with
.BR \-\-enable\-dbus\-create\-instance .
Off by default.
Also configurable via
.B KEEPALIVED_DBUS_CREATE_INSTANCE=yes
in
.IR shorewalld.conf .
.TP
.BI \-\-keepalived\-walk\-interval " SECONDS"
Seconds between full MIB walks (default:
.BR 30 ).
Also configurable via
.B KEEPALIVED_WALK_INTERVAL
in
.IR shorewalld.conf .

.SH tap SUBCOMMAND
.B shorewalld tap
is an inspection tool that binds a dnstap Unix socket and pretty-prints
every DNS answer frame it receives.  Useful for verifying that
.B pdns-recursor
is sending frames and for tuning the DNS allowlist without starting the
full daemon.

.PP
.RS
.nf
shorewalld tap \-\-socket /run/shorewalld/dnstap.sock \e
    \-\-allowlist /etc/shorewall/dnsnames.compiled \e
    \-\-count 200
.fi
.RE

.TP
.BI \-\-socket " PATH"
Unix socket path to listen on.
.RB ( Required .)
.TP
.BI \-\-format " FORMAT"
Output format:
.B pretty
(default on a TTY),
.B structured
(key=value, grep-friendly),
.B json
(one object per frame, jq-friendly).
.TP
.BI \-\-filter\-qname " REGEX"
Show only frames whose qname matches this regular expression.
.TP
.BI \-\-filter\-rcode " NAME"
Filter by DNS rcode:
.BR NOERROR ,
.BR NXDOMAIN ,
etc.
.TP
.BI \-\-allowlist " PATH"
Path to
.I dnsnames.compiled
— each frame is tagged
.B [allowlist OK]
or
.B [unknown]
accordingly.
.TP
.BI \-\-count " N"
Exit after N matching frames and print a summary.
.TP
.B \-\-show\-queries
Include CLIENT_QUERY frames (default: response frames only).
.TP
.B \-\-no\-color
Force plain output even on a TTY.

.SH CONFIGURATION FILE
Settings are read from
.I shorewalld.conf
in shell key=value format (# comments, optional quoting).  CLI flags
always override file values.  Unknown keys are silently ignored; malformed
values raise an error at startup.

The file is searched in order:
.RS
.IP 1. 4
.I /etc/shorewalld.conf
.IP 2. 4
.I /etc/shorewall/shorewalld.conf
.RE

Example:
.RS
.nf
LISTEN_PROM=:9748
NETNS=fw,rns1,rns2
SCRAPE_INTERVAL=30
REPROBE_INTERVAL=300

LISTEN_API=/run/shorewalld/dnstap.sock
SOCKET_MODE=0660
SOCKET_GROUP=pdns

PEER_HOST=10.0.1.2
PEER_PORT=9749
PEER_AUTH_KEY_FILE=/etc/shorewall/peer.key
PEER_HEARTBEAT_INTERVAL=5

STATE_DIR=/var/lib/shorewalld
LOG_LEVEL=info
LOG_TARGET=journal
LOG_FORMAT=structured

# NFLOG log dispatcher (see section below).
LOG_DISPATCH=shorewalld
LOG_NFLOG_GROUP=1
LOG_DISPATCH_FILE=/var/log/shorewall-nft.log
LOG_DISPATCH_SOCKET=/run/shorewalld/log.sock
LOG_DISPATCH_JOURNALD=yes
LOG_DISPATCH_SYSLOG=/dev/log
.fi
.RE

.SS NFLOG log dispatcher keys
.B LOG_DISPATCH
(shorewalld | ulogd2 | none; default
.BR none )
— activate the per-netns
.B nfnetlink_log
subscription.  When set to
.BR shorewalld ,
.B LOG_NFLOG_GROUP
(positive integer) selects the kernel group to subscribe to.
Sinks are additive — any combination of
.BR LOG_DISPATCH_FILE ,
.BR LOG_DISPATCH_SOCKET ,
.BR LOG_DISPATCH_JOURNALD ,
.B LOG_DISPATCH_SYSLOG
may be set; leaving all of them unset yields a counter-only
dispatcher (Prometheus families still emitted).  Each sink has its
own bounded queue and contributes a
.BI shorewall_log_dropped_total{reason=sink_ X }
counter so backpressure is operator-visible.

.SS keepalived SNMP/MIB integration keys
.B KEEPALIVED_SNMP_UNIX
.I PATH
— path to snmpd's Unix DGRAM socket.  Setting this activates the
MIB-driven walker.  Leave unset (default) to use only the legacy
.B VRRP_SNMP_*
UDP path (if configured) or no keepalived metrics.
.PP
.B KEEPALIVED_TRAP_SOCKET
.I PATH
— path for the Unix DGRAM socket that receives SNMPv2c traps from snmpd.
Configure snmpd with
.BR "trap2sink unix:<path>" .
.PP
.B KEEPALIVED_WIDE_TABLES
(yes | no; default
.BR no )
— enable high-cardinality MIB tables.
.PP
.B KEEPALIVED_SCRAPE_VIRTUAL_SERVERS
(yes | no; default
.BR yes )
— include LVS virtual-server metrics.
.PP
.B KEEPALIVED_DBUS_METHODS
(none | readonly | all; default
.BR readonly )
— D-Bus method ACL tier.
.PP
.B KEEPALIVED_DBUS_CREATE_INSTANCE
(yes | no; default
.BR no )
— enable CreateInstance / DestroyInstance methods.
.PP
.B KEEPALIVED_WALK_INTERVAL
.I SECONDS
— walk cadence (default:
.BR 30 ).

.SH PROMETHEUS METRICS
Endpoint:
.BI http:// HOST : PORT /metrics
(Prometheus text format, UTF-8).

All metrics carry a
.B netns
label (empty string = daemon's own namespace).

.SS Rule metrics (when inet shorewall table is loaded)
.RS
.nf
shorewall_nft_packets_total             counter  netns,chain,rule_handle,comment
shorewall_nft_bytes_total               counter  netns,chain,rule_handle,comment
shorewall_nft_named_counter_packets_total counter netns,name
shorewall_nft_named_counter_bytes_total counter  netns,name
shorewall_nft_set_elements              gauge    netns,set
.fi
.RE

.SS Flowtable metrics
.RS
.nf
shorewall_nft_flowtable_packets_total   counter  netns,flowtable,family
shorewall_nft_flowtable_bytes_total     counter  netns,flowtable,family
.fi
.RE

.SS Interface metrics
.RS
.nf
shorewall_nft_iface_rx_packets_total    counter  netns,iface
shorewall_nft_iface_rx_bytes_total      counter  netns,iface
shorewall_nft_iface_tx_packets_total    counter  netns,iface
shorewall_nft_iface_tx_bytes_total      counter  netns,iface
shorewall_nft_iface_oper_state          gauge    netns,iface   (1=UP 0=DOWN)
.fi
.RE

.SS Conntrack metrics
.RS
.nf
shorewall_nft_ct_count   gauge  netns
shorewall_nft_ct_max     gauge  netns
.fi
.RE

.SS dnstap pipeline metrics (when \-\-listen\-api is set)
.RS
.nf
shorewalld_dnstap_frames_accepted_total         counter
shorewalld_dnstap_frames_decode_error_total     counter
shorewalld_dnstap_frames_dropped_queue_full_total counter
shorewalld_dnstap_connections                   gauge
shorewalld_dnstap_workers_busy                  gauge
shorewalld_dnstap_queue_depth                   gauge
.fi
.RE

.SS DNS-set per-set metrics
.RS
.nf
shorewalld_dns_set_elements                     gauge    set,family
shorewalld_dns_set_adds_total                   counter  set,family
shorewalld_dns_set_refreshes_total              counter  set,family
shorewalld_dns_set_dedup_hits_total             counter  set,family
shorewalld_dns_set_dedup_misses_total           counter  set,family
shorewalld_dns_set_expiries_total               counter  set,family
shorewalld_dns_set_last_update_age_seconds      gauge    set,family
shorewalld_dns_set_shared_qnames                gauge    set_name,family
.fi
.RE

.PP
.B shorewalld_dns_set_shared_qnames
counts how many DNS qnames feed a single shared nft set (N:1 grouping active
when value > 1).

.SS nfsets instance metrics [Wave 6 \-\- nfsets feature]
.RS
.nf
shorewalld_nfsets_entries                       gauge    instance,backend
shorewalld_nfsets_hosts                         gauge    instance,backend
shorewalld_nfsets_payload_bytes                 gauge    instance
.fi
.RE

.PP
.B shorewalld_nfsets_entries
counts nfset config entries by backend (dnstap, resolver, ip-list,
ip-list-plain).
.B shorewalld_nfsets_hosts
counts the total qname/host/source count per backend.
.B shorewalld_nfsets_payload_bytes
is an approximate payload-size gauge useful for alerting on unbounded growth.

.SS Plain-list tracker metrics [Wave 6 \-\- ip-list-plain backend]
.RS
.nf
shorewalld_plainlist_refresh_total              counter  name,source_type,outcome
shorewalld_plainlist_refresh_duration_seconds_sum   counter  name,source_type
shorewalld_plainlist_refresh_duration_seconds_count counter  name,source_type
shorewalld_plainlist_entries                    gauge    name,family
shorewalld_plainlist_last_success_timestamp_seconds gauge name
shorewalld_plainlist_inotify_active             gauge    name
shorewalld_plainlist_errors_total               counter  name,source_type,error_type
.fi
.RE

.PP
Label values:
.B source_type
\[bu] http | file | exec;
.B outcome
\[bu] success | failure;
.B error_type
\[bu] http_status | dns | timeout | parse | exec_exit | inotify_missing | other.
.PP
.B shorewalld_plainlist_last_success_timestamp_seconds
is a Unix-timestamp gauge (0 = never refreshed).  Alert with
.B time() \- metric > THRESHOLD .

.SS keepalived MIB-driven families (opt-in via KEEPALIVED_SNMP_UNIX)
When
.B KEEPALIVED_SNMP_UNIX
is set, shorewalld auto-registers one Prometheus family per MIB column
from the committed
.B mib.py
constants file.  Family names follow the pattern:

.RS
.nf
shorewalld_keepalived_<name>           gauge    (read-only scalars + Gauge32/Integer32 table cols)
shorewalld_keepalived_<colname>_total  counter  (Counter32/Counter64 table cols)
shorewalld_keepalived_events_total     counter  type  (traps + D-Bus signals)
.fi
.RE

Example row for the VRRP instance table:
.RS
.nf
shorewalld_keepalived_vrrpInstanceState     gauge   index
shorewalld_keepalived_vrrpInstanceBecomeMaster_total counter index
.fi
.RE

For the full family list and cardinality guidance see
.IR docs/shorewalld/keepalived-snmp.md .

.SS VRRP metrics [Wave 8/9 \-\- keepalived D-Bus + SNMP, opt-in via \-\-enable\-vrrp\-collector]
.RS
.nf
shorewalld_vrrp_state                           gauge    bus_name,instance,vr_id,nic,family
shorewalld_vrrp_priority                        gauge    bus_name,instance,vr_id
shorewalld_vrrp_effective_priority              gauge    bus_name,instance,vr_id
shorewalld_vrrp_last_transition_timestamp_seconds gauge  bus_name,instance,vr_id
shorewalld_vrrp_vip_count                       gauge    bus_name,instance,vr_id,family
shorewalld_vrrp_master_transitions_total        counter  bus_name,instance,vr_id
shorewalld_vrrp_scrape_errors_total             counter  reason
.fi
.RE

.PP
.B shorewalld_vrrp_state
encodes the keepalived state integer: 1=BACKUP, 2=MASTER, 3=FAULT via D-Bus;
via SNMP, state 0=init is also possible.
.B shorewalld_vrrp_priority
and
.B shorewalld_vrrp_effective_priority
are filled by SNMP augmentation (see
.BR \-\-vrrp\-snmp\-enable );
reported as 0 when SNMP is not configured.
.B shorewalld_vrrp_vip_count
reflects
.I vrrpInstanceVipsStatus
from KEEPALIVED-MIB: 1=allSet, 2=notAllSet; 0 if SNMP is unavailable.
.B shorewalld_vrrp_master_transitions_total
is the cumulative transitions-to-MASTER counter
.RI ( vrrpInstanceBecomeMaster );
0 if SNMP is unavailable.
.B shorewalld_vrrp_scrape_errors_total
reason values:
.B dbus_unavailable
(bus unreachable or jeepney absent),
.B timeout
(per D-Bus call deadline exceeded),
.B properties_get
(GetAll call failed),
.B parse
(unexpected property format),
.B snmp_timeout
(SNMP walk timed out),
.B snmp_parse
(unexpected SNMP OID value).

.SS NFLOG log-dispatcher metrics (when LOG_DISPATCH=shorewalld)
.TP
.B shorewall_log_total{chain,disposition,netns}
Counter.  NFLOG events observed by shorewalld, one row per
.RI ( chain , " disposition" , " netns" )
triple.  Monotonic.  Driven by the LOGFORMAT prefix: a rule like
.BI \[dq]nft log group " N " prefix " \[dq]Shorewall:net-fw:DROP:\[dq] \[dq]"
increments
.BR shorewall_log_total{chain=\[dq]net-fw\[dq],disposition=\[dq]DROP\[dq],netns=\[dq]fw\[dq]} .
.TP
.B shorewall_log_events_total
Counter (no labels).  Grand total of events received by the
dispatcher; matches the sum over
.BR shorewall_log_total .
Useful on dashboards before the operator has indexed the triple
space.
.TP
.B shorewall_log_dropped_total{reason}
Counter.  Events dropped because a sink's bounded queue was full at
.BR put_nowait .
Label values:
.BR sink_file ,
.BR sink_socket ,
.BR sink_journald ,
.BR sink_syslog .
Non-zero means the named sink is slower than the event rate; take
action (faster consumer, larger kernel buffer, or drop the sink).
.sp
Worker-side drops (kernel-to-worker buffer overflow or parent
SEQPACKET full, where the event never reaches the parent dispatcher
at all) are logged rate-limited but NOT reflected in this counter:
the parent simply never received the event.

.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/shorewalld.conf
Primary configuration file location.
.TP
.I /etc/shorewall/shorewalld.conf
Fallback configuration file location.
.TP
.I /etc/shorewall/dnsnames.compiled
Written by
.B shorewall\-nft start
from the
.B dns:
and
.B dnsr:
references in
.I rules
and from the
.I nfsets
file.  shorewalld reads this as its DNS-set allowlist.
.TP
.I /var/lib/shorewalld/
Default state directory.  The daemon persists DNS set contents here so sets
survive daemon restarts without waiting for the recursor to re-answer every name.
.TP
.I /run/shorewalld/
Runtime directory created by the systemd unit via
.BR RuntimeDirectory= .
Unix sockets live here.
.TP
.I /run/shorewalld/control.sock
Control socket used by
.B shorewall\-nft start
and
.B shorewall\-nft restart
to register instances and request DNS-set seeds.
.TP
.I packaging/systemd/shorewalld.service
Recommended systemd unit (single process,
.B \-\-netns auto
).
.TP
.I packaging/systemd/shorewalld@.service
Templated unit for per-netns process isolation.
.TP
.I packaging/pdns-recursor/shorewalld.lua.template
Lua config template for pdns_recursor to enable the dnstap stream.
.TP
.I /etc/default/shorewalld
(Debian/Ubuntu) Sysconfig defaults file parsed by the systemd unit for
environment variable overrides.
.TP
.I /etc/sysconfig/shorewalld
(RPM-based distros) Same purpose as
.IR /etc/default/shorewalld .

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Clean shutdown (SIGTERM or SIGINT).
.TP
.B 1
Fatal startup or runtime error.
.TP
.B 2
Argument or configuration error.

.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Start with Prometheus metrics only, auto-discovering all namespaces:
.RS
.nf
shorewalld \-\-listen\-prom :9748 \-\-netns auto
.fi
.RE
.PP
Enable the DNS-set pipeline alongside metrics, with socket access for
the pdns-recursor group:
.RS
.nf
shorewalld \-\-listen\-prom :9748 \e
    \-\-instance fw:/etc/shorewall46 \e
    \-\-listen\-api /run/shorewalld/dnstap.sock \e
    \-\-socket\-mode 0660 \-\-socket\-group pdns \e
    \-\-netns auto
.fi
.RE
.PP
Inspect the live dnstap stream with allowlist tagging (exits after 100 frames):
.RS
.nf
shorewalld tap \-\-socket /run/shorewalld/dnstap.sock \e
    \-\-allowlist /etc/shorewall/dnsnames.compiled \e
    \-\-count 100
.fi
.RE
.PP
Enable HA peer replication between two firewall nodes:
.RS
.nf
shorewalld \-\-listen\-prom :9748 \-\-netns auto \e
    \-\-instance fw:/etc/shorewall46 \e
    \-\-listen\-api /run/shorewalld/dnstap.sock \e
    \-\-peer\-host 10.0.1.2 \e
    \-\-peer\-auth\-key\-file /etc/shorewall/peer.key
.fi
.RE
.PP
Override the systemd unit without editing it:
.RS
.nf
mkdir \-p /etc/systemd/system/shorewalld.service.d
cat > /etc/systemd/system/shorewalld.service.d/override.conf <<'EOF'
[Service]
ExecStart=
ExecStart=/usr/bin/shorewalld \e
    \-\-listen\-prom 0.0.0.0:9748 \e
    \-\-instance fw:/etc/shorewall46 \e
    \-\-listen\-api /run/shorewalld/dnstap.sock \e
    \-\-netns auto
EOF
systemctl daemon\-reload && systemctl restart shorewalld
.fi
.RE

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR shorewall\-nft (8),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-nfsets (5),
.BR nft (8),
.BR pdns\-recursor (1)

Full documentation:
.I docs/shorewalld/index.md
in the project repository.

.SH AUTHOR
André Valentin <avalentin@marcant.net>

.SH BUGS
Report bugs to the project issue tracker.
For security vulnerabilities see
.IR SECURITY.md .
