.TH SHOREWALL-NFT-BLACKLIST 5 "2026-04-20" "shorewall-nft 1.10.0" "File Formats"
.SH NAME
shorewall\-nft\-blacklist \- static source address blocklist for shorewall-nft
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I blacklist
file is the standalone (legacy) static blocklist.  Each entry is compiled
into drop rules fired before any zone-pair evaluation.  This form lists
simple address/prefix/protocol/port tuples.
.PP
For rule-syntax blocklist entries (ACTION SOURCE DEST PROTO…) use the
separate
.B blrules
file (see
.IR shorewall\-nft\-blrules (5)).
.PP
Both files are parsed at compile time; the
.I blacklist
standalone file takes precedence for plain address drops.
.PP
.B Dynamic blacklisting
is controlled by the
.B DYNAMIC_BLACKLIST
setting in
.IR shorewall.conf :
.TP
.B No
Dynamic blacklisting disabled.
.TP
.B Yes
Runtime blocking via nft set manipulation
.RB ( "shorewall\-nft drop" / blacklist / allow ).
.TP
.B ipset-only
Use a kernel ipset as the backing store instead of nft sets.
.TP
.B ipset,disconnect
Use ipset and additionally tear down existing conntrack state for
newly blacklisted addresses.
.TP
.B ipset,disconnect-src
Like
.B ipset,disconnect
but only tears down flows where the blacklisted address is the source.
.PP
For static compile-time blocking use this file.  For dynamic (runtime)
blocking use
.B shorewall\-nft drop
/
.B blacklist
/
.BR allow .
For hostname-based or URL-backed blocklists use
.IR shorewall\-nft\-nfsets (5).

.SH FILE FORMAT
Location:
.I /etc/shorewall/blacklist
(or inside a merged
.IR /etc/shorewall46/ ).
.PP
Columns are whitespace-separated.  Lines beginning with
.B #
are comments.

.TS
l l l.
Column	Required	Description
_
ADDRESS	yes	IP address or CIDR prefix to block
PROTO	no	Protocol filter (optional narrowing)
PORT	no	Port filter (optional narrowing)
.TE

.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Block an address range and a specific host:
.RS
.nf
#ADDRESS            PROTO  PORT
198.51.100.0/24
203.0.113.5
.fi
.RE
.PP
Block a specific host only for TCP port 25 (spam):
.RS
.nf
198.51.100.99       tcp    25
.fi
.RE
.PP
Block an IPv6 prefix:
.RS
.nf
2001:db8:bad::/48
.fi
.RE

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR shorewall\-nft (8),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-blrules (5),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-nfsets (5),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-rules (5)

.SH AUTHOR
André Valentin <avalentin@marcant.net>

.SH BUGS
Report bugs to the project issue tracker.
