.TH SHOREWALL-NFT-ZONES 5 "2026-04-24" "shorewall-nft 1.11.0" "File Formats"
.SH NAME
shorewall\-nft\-zones \- zone definitions for shorewall-nft
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I zones
file defines the network security zones used by the firewall.  Every other
configuration file that references a zone name (interfaces, hosts, policy,
rules, …) must use zone names declared here.

The compiler reads this file during the IR-construction pass
.RB ( build_ir()
in
.IR compiler/ir.py ).
Each zone becomes a named chain group in the emitted
.I inet shorewall
nft table.

.SH FILE FORMAT
Location:
.I /etc/shorewall/zones
(or inside a merged
.IR /etc/shorewall46/ ).
.PP
Lines beginning with
.B #
are comments.  Blank lines are ignored.  Columns are whitespace-separated.

.TS
l l l.
Column	Required	Description
_
ZONE	yes	Zone name; up to 10 alphanumeric characters
TYPE	yes	Zone type (see below)
OPTIONS	no	Zone options (comma-separated)
IN_OPTIONS	no	Interface ingress options for this zone
OUT_OPTIONS	no	Interface egress options for this zone
.TE

.SS Zone types
.TP
.B firewall
The firewall host itself.  There must be exactly one firewall zone (usually
named
.BR fw ).
.TP
.B ip
Dual-stack zone (IPv4 and IPv6).  Use this in merged
.I /etc/shorewall46
configs.
.TP
.B ipv4
IPv4-only zone.
.TP
.B ipv6
IPv6-only zone.
.TP
.B bport[6]
Bridge port zone.
.TP
.B ipsec[6]
IPSEC zone.  The compiler injects
.B policy in|out ipsec
clauses into the zone-pair chains for this zone.  See IPsec OPTIONS below.

.SS IPsec OPTIONS (column 3 for ipsec zones)
These options narrow the IPsec policy match emitted for the zone.
.TP
.BI mss= N
Override MSS for tunnelled traffic.
.TP
.B strict
Require that every packet traverses an IPSEC SA (no clear-text bypass).
.TP
.B next
Match the next IPsec SA in a bundle (nested tunnels).
.TP
.BI reqid= N
Match the SA request ID
.IR N .
A comma-separated list (\fBreqid=\fIN1\fB,\fIN2\fB,\fI...\fR) is also
accepted; the compiler emits
.B "ipsec <dir> reqid { N1, N2, ... }"
so a single zone can cover a multi-SA tunnel (e.g. one ESP and one
AH SA for the same site-to-site, or per-endpoint reqids in a mesh).
A single value emits the bare
.B "ipsec <dir> reqid N"
form.
.TP
.BI spi= N
Match the SA SPI value
.IR N .
.TP
.BI proto= PROTO
\fBNot supported by nft 1.1.x.\fR Accepted by the parser for
configuration round-trip but
.B silently dropped from emit
\(em a
.B UserWarning
is raised at compile time so the user knows the filter won't survive
into the nft ruleset. The nft
.B ipsec
keyword has no protocol sub-field; only
.IR reqid / spi / "ip[6] saddr" / daddr
are matched. To enforce ESP-only or AH-only traffic, see
.B iptables-nft-restore
of an
.B "-m policy --proto esp"
rule as an emergency fallback.
.TP
.BI mode= MODE
\fBNot supported by nft 1.1.x.\fR Same caveat as
.IR proto= :
parsed and stored, but dropped from emit with a
.B UserWarning .
The nft
.B ipsec
keyword has no encapsulation-mode sub-field. Use
.IR reqid=
to narrow the match per SA \(em that effectively pins the rule to a
specific tunnel mode by tying it to a specific SA.
.TP
.BI mark= MARK [/ MASK ]
\fBNot supported on the IPsec keyword.\fR Parsed and stored, but
dropped from emit with a
.B UserWarning .
nft has no IPsec-SA mark sub-field; if a packet-mark match is needed,
add a
.B meta mark
clause in the rule itself instead of attaching it to the zone.

.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Minimal dual-stack setup:
.RS
.nf
#ZONE   TYPE    OPTIONS
fw      firewall
net     ip
loc     ip
dmz     ip
.fi
.RE
.PP
IPv4/IPv6 separate zones (legacy layout for
.I /etc/shorewall
+
.I /etc/shorewall6
):
.RS
.nf
fw      firewall
net     ipv4
loc     ipv4
.fi
.RE
.PP
Zone with IPSEC sub-zone:
.RS
.nf
fw      firewall
net     ip
loc     ip
vpn     ipsec
.fi
.RE

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR shorewall\-nft (8),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-interfaces (5),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-policy (5),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-rules (5)

.SH AUTHOR
André Valentin <avalentin@marcant.net>

.SH BUGS
Report bugs to the project issue tracker.
