.TH SHOREWALL-NFT-SNAT 5 "2026-04-24" "shorewall-nft 1.11.0" "File Formats"
.SH NAME
shorewall\-nft\-snat \- source NAT rules for shorewall-nft
.SH SYNOPSIS
.I /etc/shorewall/snat
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I snat
file is the modern, featureful SNAT/masquerade configuration file,
replacing the legacy
.I masq
file.  Each row emits one or more rules in the
.B postrouting
chain of the
.I inet shorewall
nft table.
.PP
For classic 1:1 host mapping see
.BR shorewall\-nft\-nat (5).
.SH COLUMNS
Location:
.I /etc/shorewall/snat
(or inside a merged
.IR /etc/shorewall46/ ).
.PP
Columns are whitespace-separated.  Lines beginning with
.B #
are comments.

.TS
l l l.
Column	Required	Description
_
ACTION	yes	SNAT action (see below)
SOURCE	yes	Source address or CIDR
DEST	yes	Outbound interface or address
PROTO	no	Protocol filter
DPORT	no	Destination port filter
SPORT	no	Source port filter
ORIGDEST	no	Original destination filter
PROBABILITY	no	Probabilistic match (0.0\(en1.0)
MARK	no	Connection mark match
USER	no	User/group match
SWITCH	no	Runtime switch name
IPSEC	no	IPSEC policy match
.TE

.SS ACTION syntax
.TP
.BI SNAT( addr )
Translate the source address to
.IR addr .
.TP
.BI SNAT( a1 , a2 ,\|…\|)
Round-robin across a list of addresses.
.TP
.BI SNAT( addr : port-range )
Translate to
.I addr
and a port drawn from
.IR port-range .
.TP
.B MASQUERADE
Dynamic masquerade (use the outbound interface's address).
.TP
.BI MASQUERADE( port-range )
Masquerade and restrict source port to
.IR port-range .
.TP
.B CONTINUE
Skip remaining SNAT rules for this packet.
.TP
.B ACCEPT
Accept without SNAT.
.TP
.B NONAT
Exempt from SNAT (synonym for ACCEPT in the postrouting context).
.TP
.BI LOG[: level ][: tag ]: ACTION
Log the packet (at
.I level
severity, with optional
.IR tag ),
then apply
.IR ACTION .
Example:
.BR LOG:info:nat:SNAT(203.0.113.10) .
.PP
Append modifiers (colon-separated after the address) to
.B SNAT(…)
or
.BR MASQUERADE :
.TP
.B :random
Randomise the source port.
.TP
.B :persistent
Assign a consistent address per client (for round-robin pools).
.TP
.B :fully-random
Fully randomise the port (nft
.BR fully-random ).

.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Masquerade all outbound traffic on eth0:
.RS
.nf
#ACTION      SOURCE              DEST
MASQUERADE   192.168.1.0/24      eth0
.fi
.RE
.PP
Static SNAT to a public address:
.RS
.nf
SNAT(203.0.113.10)   10.0.0.0/8   eth0
.fi
.RE
.PP
Round-robin across two addresses with persistence:
.RS
.nf
SNAT(203.0.113.10,203.0.113.11):persistent   192.168.1.0/24   eth0
.fi
.RE
.PP
Exempt VPN traffic from SNAT (allow direct routing):
.RS
.nf
NONAT   192.168.1.0/24   eth0   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   ipsec
.fi
.RE

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR shorewall\-nft (8),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-nat (5),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-masq (5),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-rules (5),
.BR shorewall\-nft\-nfsets (5)

.SH AUTHOR
André Valentin <avalentin@marcant.net>

.SH BUGS
Report bugs to the project issue tracker.
